=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
Article
Journal of Theoretical Politics
2020, Vol. 32(1) 70–95
The Author(s) 2020
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/0951629819893024
journals.sagepub.com/home/jtp
Preference vote and intra-
party competition in open list
PR systems
Jose´ Antonio Cheibub
Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA
Gisela Sin
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA
Abstract
Open list proportional representation (PR) systems require that candidates seek personal votes
in order to be successful. This feature of the system is considered to lead to intense competition
among co-partisans and, ultimately, to weak electoral and legislative parties, narrow public poli-
cies, localism, clientelism, and corruption. We examine the distribution of personal votes among
candidates from the same party for seven elections to the Brazilian national chamber of deputies
(1990–2014). These elections are widely seen as hyper-competitive, particularly among candidates
from the same list. Yet, the patterns in the data are not compatible with such a view. We find that
the level of overall competition is considerably lower than the absolute number of parties and
candidates competing would suggest. More significantly, we find that the number of viable candi-
dates within party lists is limited and that their votes are distributed in such a way that indicates a
contained competition among co-partisans during the election. These findings add to recent work
that builds a more nuanced view of ballot structure, competition, and personalism.
Keywords
Proportional representation; personal vote; open list PR; intra-party competition; electoral sys-
tems; elections in Brazil
Corresponding author:
Jose´ Antonio Cheibub, Texas A&M University, 2010 Allen Building,4348 TAMU, College Station, TX 77843,
USA.
Email: cheibub@tamu.edu


=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
1. Introduction
Proportional representation (PR) electoral systems are based on the principle that
seats are first allocated to a collective entity: the party. In all cases, the party gains
seats in proportion to the share of votes it receives. However, PR systems differ in
the way parties allocate seats to individual candidates. In closed-list systems
(CLPR), parties rank candidates and voters cast a ballot for the party. The seats
are allocated to individual candidates according to their rank in the list the party
builds prior to the election. If the party receives n seats, the top n candidates, as
ranked by the party, are those who win seats in the legislature. By contrast, in
open-list systems (OLPR), parties present a set of candidates running under their
label, but do not rank them prior to the election. Voters cast a ballot for an indi-
vidual candidate (a preference vote), and parties receive seats in proportion to the
sum of votes received by all the candidates running under their label. Seats are dis-
tributed to individual candidates according to the number of personal votes they
received. If the party receives n seats, the top n candidates, as determined by the
number of votes they personally received, are those who win the legislative seats.1
Scholars have claimed that because in CLPR systems voters cannot alter the
order of candidates the party presents, competition occurs among parties; candi-
dates’ attributes play little or no role in voters’ decisions. In contrast, it is argued,
in open-list systems competition is mostly among co-partisans and it is based on
candidates’ personal attributes. Although parties receive seats in proportion to
their votes, candidates within each party win seats because they obtain the highest
number of personal votes. For this reason, candidates emphasize their individual
attributes to make sure that one of the seats the party wins goes to them and not
to one of their co-partisans. Thus, scholars posit that competition in OLPR elec-
tions occurs not only among parties, but also among candidates.2 In these systems,
elections are characterized by both inter- and intra-party competition.
We argue, in contrast, that lists in OLPR systems are composed in such a way as
to minimize the need for candidates from the same party to fight with one another
during the election. We suggest that intra-party competition in an OLPR system is
much more constrained than initially thought. We find this to be true especially for
small districts and for larger parties, where coordination is easier to achieve. For
larger districts, we find that coordination is more difficult to attain, although it is
not impossible.
Using data from elections for the Brazilian national Chamber of Deputies (CD),
which are universally seen as highly competitive and personalistic, we provide evi-
dence in support of the view that intra-party competition is significantly controlled.
Our analysis reveals that even in these most unlikely settings, intra-party competi-
tion is limited; many lists are carefully built so that competition among co-partisans
is significantly reduced as candidates seek votes.
This article is organized into five additional sections. In Section 2, we review
new literature on electoral systems to which this article is related. In Section 3, we
explain the basics of elections for the Brazilian CD. In Section 4, we analyze the
absolute number of candidates in party lists. We distinguish irrelevant candidates,
Cheibub and Sin
71


=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
which comprise more than half of all candidates participating in the elections, and
identify strong or viable candidates. These are the candidates who have a chance
of winning seats for the CD. Section 5 presents the evidence of limited competition
in party lists. It is divided into three sub-sections, each focusing on a different way
of demonstrating ‘list containment.’ Section 6 concludes with a discussion of the
implications of our findings and possibilities for future work.
2. OLPR electoral systems and intra-party competition
PR systems with preference vote are increasingly popular. The reason may reflect
voters’ desire to cast a ballot for persons and not organizations: when voters are
directly responsible for the election of specific candidates, they can hold them indi-
vidually accountable in a way they cannot if their only choice were the entire list
political parties build (see Colomer, 2011; Manin, 1997; Mitchell, 2000). However,
because it requires that candidates win over their co-partisans in order to be elected,
it is widely accepted that candidates under preferential list PR will cultivate their
own, personal, reputation at the expense of their party’s reputation, thus weakening
the ties between voters, candidates, and parties (Carey and Shugart, 1995). The
consequences of the personalism spawned by intra-party competition are said to be
numerous and noteworthy: electoral campaigns become focused on individuals and
not policies, party programs are diluted, and public policies respond to local rather
than national concerns. Owing to intra-party competition, parties become dimin-
ished in their capacity to enforce a ‘‘brand name’’ and become a simple list of candi-
dates who compete among themselves to get the most votes. The final result are
weak political parties and widespread competition consisting of a war of all candi-
dates against all. For a review of this literature, see Mershon (2020) in this issue.
We find this conclusion to be incorrect. It depends on three assumptions that are
not warranted. First, it assumes that if preference vote is present, then intra-party
competition exists at the time of election. However, it ignores that parties can com-
pose their lists strategically such that candidates from the same list seek votes from
non-overlapping constituencies. Second, it assumes that personalism always entails
narrow and parochial support from constituents. However, it ignores that candi-
dates may choose to emphasize traits that connect them to valence or ideological
issues. Third, it assumes that the only instrument parties have to influence candi-
dates is their placement in the party list. However, parties do have resources that
can be deployed strategically to generate (personal) votes for candidates they prefer
to see elected.
We argue that even in OLPR systems political parties retain a significant role in
shaping electoral competition. Office-seeking parties have a strong incentive to limit
competition inside the list to prevent the eruption of a war of all against all within
their lists. Parties can do so because they control access to their label and are able
to deploy financial, logistical, and operational resources that are highly desirable
by individual candidates. Candidates, in turn, also have an interest in limiting com-
petition within their list. Only a small number of candidates are able to get personal
votes that are sufficient to guarantee their election; all other candidates need the
72
Journal of Theoretical Politics 32(1)


=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
support of their parties in order to get elected. Given that party resources are lim-
ited, those who see themselves as viable want to limit competition stemming from
similar candidates. Thus, in OLPR, intra-list competition happens, like in any other
electoral system, prior to the election.
Brazil probably represents the least likely case for finding evidence of limited
intra-party competition. The received wisdom about CD elections since the return
of democracy in 1985 emphasizes that political parties are weak, that contests are
hyper-competitive, and that candidates must fight for votes with co-partisans at
least as much as they do with candidates from other parties.3 Indeed, such conclu-
sions come from the analyses of the raw numbers involved in these elections. For
example, in the 2014 election, 32 parties competed for votes in 27 multimember dis-
tricts with magnitudes ranging from 8 to 70 (with a median magnitude of 10).
Parties presented 768 lists across the 27 districts, which together contained 5,882
candidates seeking one of the 513 seats in the Chamber of Deputies, thus implying
an overall rate of 11 candidates per seat. The average list contained eight candi-
dates, with a standard deviation of 12. The effective number of parties in 2014 was
over 14, both in the electorate and in the CD. Yet, we show that intra-party com-
petition was substantially constrained, even under these circumstances.
Careful examination of the aggregate results reveals a different world, more
ordained and constrained than the one that is usually depicted. The data show that
the major parties and viable candidates often succeed in reducing partisan self-
destruction. The fact that intra-party competition is not rampant during the elec-
tion implies that much of it occurs, like in majoritarian and CLPR systems, prior
to the election.
The sharp contrast in the level of intra-party competition between OLPR and
CLPR systems has been invoked as an explanation for a large number of impor-
tant outcomes.4 This article adds to the growing list of work that sees a less-sharp
distinction between these two systems and challenges the connection between the
ballot structure, intra-party competition, personalism, and these outcomes. Studies
such as those of Espı´rito-Santo and Sanches (2018), Sanches and Espı´rito-Santo
(2016), Nemoto and Shugart (2013), Latner and McGann (2005), and Shugart et
al. (2005) show that candidate attributes matter even where parties are in charge of
ranking candidates before elections and voters can only cast a ballot for a party.
Others, in turn, show that even in the presence of preferential voting, party organi-
zations have other instruments they can deploy to act strategically. Folke et al.
(2016), for example, point to a ‘primary effect’ in Sweden as parties use the infor-
mation provided by preferential votes to compose lists for future elections and
identify candidates for higher offices. Furthermore, the view that parties in prefer-
ence list PR systems will be ideologically weak and composed of maverick candi-
dates who cultivate their own unique base of support among voters is powerfully
undermined by two of the articles included in this issue. Folke and Rickne (2020)
showed that in Sweden’s local elections, politicians who communicate with voters
in terms of ideology and policy preferences, receive relatively higher numbers of
personal votes. Moreover, not only do they fail to find a correlation between ideo-
logical deviation and preference votes, they show that, when there is a voting
Cheibub and Sin
73


=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
conflict between parties and politicians, candidates who think the party’s position
should be prioritized are favored with preference votes. Carroll and Nalepa (2020),
in turn, show how the very aspect that is considered to lead to weak parties in
OLPR, the fact that party leaders cannot rank candidates prior to elections,
induces parties to recruit individuals with a preference profile similar to that of
party leaders. The consequence, as they show, are more, rather than less, ideologi-
cally cohesive parties in OLPR than in CLPR. Finally, closer to our own work
here, Crisp et al. (2013) and Swindle (2002) showed how parties in preferential PR
systems strategically compose their lists and how, in so doing, they significantly
mitigate, if not altogether prevent, intra-party competition. We add to these contri-
butions by presenting evidence that intra-party competition is limited even in a set-
ting where unbridled competition is seen as the norm.
3. Elections for the CD
Brazil is divided into 27 electoral districts, which correspond to each of the 26
states and the federal district of Brası´lia (for this reason, we use ‘districts’ and
‘states’ interchangeably). Each of these districts elects three senators and one gov-
ernor in majoritarian elections. Senators are elected for 8 years but the Senate is
renewed by 1/3 and 2/3 every 4 years. Governors and the President are elected for
4 years in majority run-off contests and, since 1998, have been allowed one imme-
diate reelection.
Elections for the national CD and the 27 unicameral state legislatures are held
under identical rules. The CD has 513 members (503 in 1990) and membership in
state-level assemblies ranges from 24 to 94. In both cases, the entire state is one dis-
trict. Voters have one vote, which can be cast for the party label or for a candidate
running under the party label (there are no independents). Voters do not see a pre-
printed list of candidates when they enter the booth. Whether voting on paper or
electronically, voters must enter the number or the name of their party and/or can-
didate. For this reason, the ‘list’ of candidates has to be conceived loosely: candi-
dates run under the same party label, but are not in any way presented collectively
to voters.
Votes for the party label and votes for individual candidates from that party are
pooled to compute the party total vote, PV. Seat allocation is first made to the par-
ties on the basis of district quotas Qd = VV=M, where VV is the number of valid
votes in the district, and M is the magnitude of the district. Parties get as many
seats as their ‘party quota’ QP = PV=Qd. The n seats a party wins are allocated to
the top-n candidates ranked in terms of their personal votes. In other words, the n
candidates elected from the party slate are those with the highest number of votes.
Remainder seats are allocated through the highest-average method. Since 1990, the
election of 889 representatives (out of 3,334 deputies elected, or 27%), happened
thanks to the remainder distribution.
There are two important features of the OLPR system in Brazil that matter for
our analysis. First, there is a district-level threshold, even though there is no
national threshold. Lists that do not receive at least one Qd are excluded from the
74
Journal of Theoretical Politics 32(1)


=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
distribution of seats. Since the Chamber of Deputies is highly malapportioned in
favor of states with relatively small populations, the effective threshold varies con-
siderably among states.5 In Sa˜ o Paulo, for instance, the threshold has been
100%=70 seats since 1994, which is equal to 1.43% of the valid votes; in Roraima
(and all the other 10 states with district magnitude equal to 8), it is 100%=8 seats,
which equals 12.5% of the valid votes. In absolute terms, this means that in 2014,
a party in Sa˜ o Paulo needed to obtain at least 303,802 votes in order to avoid
exclusion from the process of seat allocation; in Roraima, the party needed 27,837
votes. The coalition rule, which we discuss next, allows parties that would not
reach the district threshold by themselves to receive at least one seat.
Second, parties are able to and do frequently enter into electoral coalitions when
running for seats in the CD (as well as for state assemblies); and for the purpose of
seat allocation, coalitions are treated as a single party. Yet, in what follows, we
ignore the coalition and focus the analysis entirely on the list of candidates com-
posed by the party, whether the party is running alone or in a coalition. We have
three reasons for doing so.
First, the electoral legislation treats a coalition as a single list only for purposes
of seat allocation. The distribution of seats to coalitions is identical to the distribu-
tion of seats to parties running alone: votes given to candidates and parties com-
posing the coalition are pooled to compute CV, the total votes given to the
coalition as a whole. To determine the number of seats the coalition can ‘buy,’ CV
(rather than PV, defined above) is divided by the district quota Qd. Note that vot-
ers who do not choose a candidate can vote for the parties that compose the coali-
tion, but they cannot vote for the coalition. This is so because the coalition does
not exist as an entity for the purposes of electoral campaigning. The allocation of
seats to candidates is also identical to what happens in individual parties: the num-
ber of preference votes coalition candidates receive determines their rank, and the
top-n candidates in the list, regardless of their party affiliation, receive the n seats
the coalition wins. Thus, and this is very important, coalitions for proportional
elections only matter after the election, strictly for the aggregation of the votes and
distribution of seats. In the proportional elections, parties and candidates do not
compete as members of a coalition and voters are rarely aware that a candidate for
federal deputy belongs to a party that is in coalition with another party. In fact,
the legislation explicitly indicates that, when competing for the CD, parties should
only use their own name and/or acronym during the campaign (TSE, 2012: art.6,
paragraph 2).
Second, parties in the same coalition do not negotiate anything about the con-
duct of the campaign for federal deputies. The list of candidates is not the result of
a process of bargaining among parties that seek to optimize their own lists with the
coalition in mind. Rather, they are simply the addition of lists independently gener-
ated by the parties that compose the coalition.6 The rules are such that coalitions
do not constrain the number of candidates a party can include in its list. In the
period studied here, 1990–2014, only 9 coalition lists, out of 796, reached the maxi-
mum number of candidates they could have presented.7
Cheibub and Sin
75


=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
Third, gubernatorial elections drive the formation of coalitions. According to
the legislation, coalitions need to be consistent at the district level across majoritar-
ian and proportional contests. In other words, two parties that coalesce to elect a
governor must either remain together or run separately in the CD elections; but
they are not allowed to coalesce with a third party that participates in a different
gubernatorial coalition (Mesquita, 2016). Thus, consistency is defined with respect
to the coalition that forms to elect the governor.8 One of the implications of this is
that coalitions are agreed at the district and not at the national level. Not only do
they vary across elections, they also vary across states in the same election.
In sum, coalitions for CD elections have little or no effect on how party lists are
composed. They do not constrain the list of candidates a party presents and, plau-
sibly, they do not affect how voters cast their ballot. For this reason, when it comes
to the formation of candidate lists, the party, whether running alone or running in
coalition, is the relevant unit of analysis.
4. Party lists and the number of candidates
In absolute terms, parties present relatively large lists of candidates for the CD.
Between 1990 and 2014, 28,618 candidates, distributed over 3,816 party lists, com-
peted for one of the 3,334 seats under dispute. This suggests an environment of
intense intra-party competition. Yet, the absolute number of candidates running is
quite misleading as a measure of competitiveness. In contrast to the arguments
advanced by the literature, we find that the majority of candidates who run are
irrelevant: they could be dropped from the race and the final allocation of seats
would not change at all. Furthermore, we also find that the number of strong and
competitive candidates in each list is actually small. In this section, we define and
identify irrelevant and strong candidates in two different ways. In both cases, we
find that about 60% of candidates are irrelevant.
4.1. Irrelevant candidates
Scholars and pundits alike commonly argue that in OLPR systems parties have an
incentive to make their lists as large as possible. This belief comes from the fact that
the total number of seats a list receives depends on the sum of the votes obtained
by all candidates in that list. Thus, they argue, the more votes, the better chances to
win an additional seat, implying that lists should be composed of as many candi-
dates as there are individuals willing to compete. These individuals would, then,
‘fight it off’ during the electoral campaign for the preferences of a given pool of
voters.9 Any additional vote to a candidate in the list adds to the list’s total and,
thus, increases the probability that the list would get one extra seat. Indeed, given
the number of candidates running in each election, as can be seen in Table 1, one
would think that this is exactly what parties do: they open their lists to anyone who
wants to run and let candidates fend for themselves during the campaing period.10
76
Journal of Theoretical Politics 32(1)


=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
A closer examination of the lists, however, strongly suggests that the environ-
ment for candidates during the election is not as competitive as it first appears. To
begin with, the distribution of personal votes is very skewed. The reality of compe-
tition in CD elections is that very few candidates can be reasonably assured about
their own election: about 95% of the successful candidates were elected because of
vote pooling within the list since they did not receive enough personal votes to
reach one district quota. Many candidates, however, can be certain that they will
not be elected, and they do not represent a threat to anyone’s chances of being
elected.
Table 2 clusters the candidates who ran between 1990 and 2014 by the number
of personal votes they received, expressed as a proportion of their districts’ quota.
The numbers show that not all candidates are the same and that the vast majority
of candidates are, to put it mildly, irrelevant: 13,440 candidates, or 47%, received
less than 1% of a district quota in personal votes; 77%, over 22,000 individuals
out of 28,618, received less than 10% of a district quota. This means that, in a dis-
trict such as Sa˜ o Paulo in 2014, where over 25 million voters cast a ballot, and
where a seat cost about 300,000 votes, close to half of the candidates received less
than 3,000 personal votes; and in a district such as Amapa´ , where about half a mil-
lion people voted and a seat cost about 48,000 votes, a little less than half of the
candidates received fewer than 480 votes. The small number of votes obtained by
such a large number of candidates is clear in Figure 1.
Figure 1 shows the proportion of candidates that competed in the seven elections
between 1990 and 2014, clustered by the number of personal votes they received,
expressed as a proportion of the district quota. This figure also adds the proportion
of the total personal votes cast in all elections that each candidate cluster received.
Thus, the first column shows that 47% of all candidates received less than 1% of a
district quota in personal votes and that, together, their vote represented 1.71% of
the votes cast during the period. The figure also shows that 5.3% of the candidates
received 41% of the personal votes cast in the seven elections.
Table 1. Number of candidates and seats in elections for the Chamber of Deputies, Brazil,
1990–2014
Year
Number of candidates
Number of seats
Candidate/seat
1990
3,824
503
7.60
1994
1,530
266
5.75
1998
3,356
513
6.54
2002
4,198
513
8.18
2006
4,943
513
9.64
2010
4,885
513
9.52
2014
5,882
513
11.47
All years
28,618
3,334
8.58
Source: Compiled by the authors from TSE, Brazil (http://www.tse.jus.br/eleicoes/estatisticas/repositorio-de-dados-
eleitorais-1/repositorio-de-dados-eleitorais/).
Cheibub and Sin
77


=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
Another way to look at the weight of the candidates with the least votes is to
analyze whether such votes were helpful in pushing the total vote for their lists over
a district quota. Although small individually, collectively they might have had an
impact. This, however, is not the case. We simulated the allocation of seats in each
district for the seven elections by removing, one at a time, the votes obtained by
the candidate with the fewest personal votes.11 If candidates with a low absolute
Table 2. Number of candidates in CD elections by personal votes, Brazil, 1990–2014
Personal votes
Number of candidates
Percentage of candidates
PV\0:01Dq
13,440
46.96
0:01Dq  PV\0:10Dq
8,663
30.27
0:10Dq  PV\0:20Dq
1,976
6.90
0:20Dq  PV\0:30Dq
1,252
4.37
0:30Dq  PV\0:40Dq
1,004
3.51
0:40Dq  PV\050Dq
752
2.63
0:50Dq  PV\0:60Dq
579
2.02
0:60Dq  PV\0:70Dq
362
1.26
0:70Dq  PV\0:80Dq
196
0.68
0:80Dq  PV\0:90Dq
129
0.45
0:90Dq  PV\1:00Dq
88
0.31
1:00Dq  PV\1:50Dq
128
0.45
1:50Dq  PV\2:00Dq
30
0.10
PV.2:00Dq
19
0.07
Total
28,618
100.00
Source: Compiled by the authors from TSE, Brazil (http://www.tse.jus.br/eleicoes/estatisticas/repositorio-de-dados-
eleitorais-1/repositorio-de-dados-eleitorais/). PV = Personal votes; Dq = District quota.
Figure 1. Proportion of candidates and proportion of personal votes, CD Elections, Brazil,
1990–2014. Compiled by the authors from TSE, Brazil (http://www.tse.jus.br/eleicoes/
estatisticas/repositorio-de-dados-eleitorais-1/repositorio-de-dados-eleitorais/)
78
Journal of Theoretical Politics 32(1)


=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
number of votes contributed to the totals of their lists in any way, removing them
would change the allocation of seats to that list. We discovered that, over the seven
elections, the votes obtained by 59% of the candidates made no difference whatso-
ever in the final allocation of seats: removing their votes and reallocating the seats
produced a distribution of seats identical to the one that occurred in reality. For
example, in 2014, 1,239 candidates competed for the 70 CD seats from the state of
Sa˜ o Paulo; the votes of 789 of them could simply be ignored and the allocation of
seats, which resulted in 18 parties receiving at least one seat, would not have chan-
ged. Ignoring the votes obtained by 789/1,239 = 64% of all candidates in that dis-
trict in that election would make no difference in the way the seats were allocated
to parties and candidates in that district.
Thus, the vast majority of candidates makes no difference in the allocation of
seats as they do not help their parties gain an extra one. When we remove irrele-
vant candidates, the number of candidates that potentially matter in the race drops
to 10,592 individuals.12
4.2. Competitive or viable candidates
Elections for the CD in Brazil are obviously competitive, but the high number of
candidates per seat, the measure normally used by scholars and pundits, is not a
good indicator of the real competition candidates face. In the previous section, we
showed that the vast majority of candidates did not receive 10% of their district
quotas in personal votes. We also identified as irrelevant those candidates who
could have been removed from the race without altering in any way the distribution
of seats in their districts. While compelling, these figures are endogenous to the
elections in which the candidates competed. In this section, we identify the candi-
dates who could be considered competitive, strong, or viable on the basis of infor-
mation generated prior to the election in which they competed. We want to single
out the candidates that enter the race with a reasonable expectation that they can
win. Once we identify these candidates, we can evaluate the degree of intra-party
competition such candidates face.
We identify viable candidates in any given election by combining information
about their participation and performance in previous elections. Based on these cri-
teria, there are three groups of candidates. (1) Previous incumbents: those who at
election t had been successfully elected as governor, senator, mayor, a member of
the CD or of one of the state legislatures in a previous election. (2) Unsuccessful
past candidates: individuals who had ran for one of those offices in the past but
who were never elected. (3) Inexperienced candidates: those who had not partici-
pated in an electoral contest before t.13
We consider all previous incumbents to be strong, competitive, viable, or ‘high-
quality’ candidates. In this sense, we follow the US literature on campaigns and
elections, which considers candidates who have previously held public offices to be
‘quality candidates.’ In general they did well, in terms of personal votes: 90% of
them received more than 36% of their district quota, and no one received less than
Cheibub and Sin
79


=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
10%; as can be seen in Table 3, 61% of them were elected when they ran in one or
more of the four elections between 2002 and 2014.
Regarding the second category, past unsuccessful candidates, one could argue
that they should all be considered weak because they never won an elected posi-
tion. Yet, some of them did quite well in the past. It is reasonable, therefore, to
think that they came into the election at t expecting to be successful, but, for vari-
ous reasons, were not elected. Thus, instead of discarding all these candidates
(which would favor our argument of low intra-party competition), we decided to
include and consider strong those candidates who, although never elected before,
received in the elections he or she had participated in at least 10% of a district
quota in personal votes. This classifies as viable or strong 211 of the 212 candidates
who had tried before but were first elected at t, and 562 of the 4,781 who were not
elected at t, for a total of 773.14 Thus, 15% of the candidates who came into the
election with a prior but unsuccessful run commanded sufficient personal votes to
be considered viable candidates. Finally, 12,378 out of 19,908 candidates, 62%,
had no prior electoral experience when they ran between 2002 and 2014. Some of
these did well in terms of personal votes in the election they ran, although only 323
were elected. Some of these are candidates who believed they could attract personal
votes on the basis of activities they had engaged in outside of the electoral arena,
whether or not these activities were political. Of these candidates, we consider
viable those who were elected (with four exceptions) and, to be consistent with the
criterion adopted above, those who obtained at least 10% of a district quota in
personal votes, but were not elected. This adds 997 individuals to the set of viable
candidates: 319 of the 323 novices elected when they first ran, and 678 novices who
ended up not getting elected.15
In the end, of the 19,908 candidates who participated in elections between 2002
and 2014, 16%, (212 + 1508 + 319 + 562 + 960 + 678) or 4,238, can be consid-
ered quality, viable or strong candidates. It was among these candidates that real
competition for votes took place. This means that the ratio of candidate per seat
under dispute in the four elections was 2.1. This is a far lower rate than that
obtained by simply comparing the number of candidates with the total number of
seats under dispute, which was 8.58 (see Table 1). This suggests that intra-party
competition is much more limited than a first general analysis of candidates would
indicate.
Table 3. Candidates in CD elections according to their electoral histories, Brazil, 2002–2014
Type of Candidate
Running
Elected
Strong/Viable
Previous Incumbent
2,468
1,508
2,468
Past Unsuccessful Candidate
4,993
212
773
No Previous Electoral History
12,378
323
997
Missing History
69
9
Total
19,908
2,052
4,238
Source: Compiled by the authors from TSE, Brazil (http://www.tse.jus.br/eleicoes/estatisticas/repositorio-de-
dados-eleitorais-1/repositorio-de-dados-eleitorais/).
80
Journal of Theoretical Politics 32(1)


=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
5. Contained intra-party competition
The previous section showed that in spite of the large number of lists and candi-
dates competing for a seat in the Brazilian CD, intra-party competition seems to be
limited. Among strong candidates, the ratio of candidates per seat is 2.1, far from
the ratio of 10 the literature usually reports.
In this section, we explore the dynamics within parties to understand the level of
intra-party competition. We do this by examining the distribution of personal votes
across candidates in the same party and across parties. First, we look into whether
different parties use distinct strategies to compose their lists. We find that competi-
tive parties present candidate lists that are more efficient that those presented by
less-competitive parties. Second, we assess the degree of intra-party competition by
comparing the number of strong candidates in a list (as identified in Section 4.2)
with the number of candidates elected from that list. We find that parties tend to
build lists with as many strong candidates as seats they receive; lists that contain
multiple strong candidates win multiple seats. We interpret this as evidence that
strong candidates in the same party list are not necessarily competing for the same
seat. We also analyze the context in which these parties act, and find that district
magnitude adds uncertainty into parties’ strategies. Third, we examine the pattern
of distribution of personal votes within party and coalition lists. We show that the
distribution of votes across candidates from the same party list tends to be sharply
discontinuous when we move from the last elected to the first non-elected candi-
date. This indicates, we believe, that rather than a random group of individuals
seeking votes in competition with one another, party lists are deliberately built in a
way to reduce clashes among co-partisans.
5.1. Candidate efficiency of party lists
We define list efficiency as the ratio between the number of candidates presented
and the number of candidates elected in a list, with low ratios indicating higher
efficiency. The received view about CD elections in Brazil, as we have seen, is that
party lists are large and candidates face intense competition from co-partisans, that
is, that party lists are inefficient. Efficiency would be of no concern to either parties
or candidates. Given that seats are allocated to the lists by pooling votes across all
candidates, parties should have an incentive to present lists as large as possible.
The incentive should be stronger for consolidated, more competitive and wealthier
parties because they are those more likely to attract candidates. Thus, party lists of
more competitive parties should be highly inefficient. In a perverse way, the litera-
ture argues, the system rewards parties that are able to attract as many candidates
as possible and incite intense competition among them.
However, as we can see in Figure 2, the opposite is true. This figure presents the
ratio between the number of candidates in a party list and the number of candi-
dates elected in that list for the seven elections between 1990 and 2010, averaged
over party type and district magnitude. We can see that candidate lists presented
by more consolidated and competitive parties are considerably more efficient than
Cheibub and Sin
81


=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
those presented by weak, less-competitive ones. The former have lists that are sig-
nificantly more contained numerically.
We define as consolidated and more competitive the eight parties which, accord-
ing to Mesquita (2016), have ‘executive proclivities,’ that is, parties that have pre-
sented competitive candidates for governor in multiple elections and in multiple
districts. For her, these parties ‘have the most to gain from coordinating electoral
entry. They guarantee reduced competition and increased support for their candi-
dates in the districts they consider to be the most important in any given election’
(Mesquita, 2016: 70–71). Mesquita identifies eight such parties: the PT and the
PSDB, the two parties that have held the presidency for relatively long periods of
time since 1990 (12 years for the PT and 8 years for the PSDB) and are in opposite
sides of the ideological and electoral spectrum (Limongi and Cortez, 2010; Melo,
2014; Mesquita, 2016); four parties normally considered to be Brazil’s catch-all par-
ties, the PMDB, PFL=DEM, PTB, and the PP; and two parties that were stronger
earlier (PDT) or that have expanded later (PSB) in the period.16 The ‘executive pro-
clivities’ of these parties, alongside with their desire to reduce competition, trans-
lates into relatively higher levels of list efficiency in elections for the CD. Together,
these parties presented 14,237 candidates across all seven elections and elected
2,617; they presented 5.4 candidates for every candidate elected. The remaining par-
ties, considered to be much less competitive, presented 14,381 candidates and
elected 717, meaning that they presented 20 candidates for every candidate they
elected. The candidate efficiency of competitive and non-competitive parties is more
or less the same in small (DM between 8 and 12 seats), medium (DM between 16
and 31 seats), and large (DM between 39 and 70 seats) districts. Thus, intra-party
competition in the more competitive parties is substantially more restrained than in
the other parties, at least when it comes to the number of potential competitors.17
Figure 2. Party list efficiency by party type and district magnitude, CD Elections, Brazil, 1990–
2014. Compiled by the authors from TSE, Brazil (http://www.tse.jus.br/eleicoes/estatisticas/
repositorio-de-dados-eleitorais-1/repositorio-de-dados-eleitorais/)
82
Journal of Theoretical Politics 32(1)


=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
5.2. The number of strong candidates in party lists
We now move to an examination of the number of strong candidates that appear
in different party lists. What can the number of such candidates tell us about intra-
party competition? Their absolute numbers tell us almost nothing: viable candi-
dates do not necessarily face more competition from their co-partisans simply
because they are in lists with other similar candidates. For example, intra-party
competition might be less intense in a list that contains 10 viable candidates than
in a list with only 3 such candidates if the former list is from a more competitive
party that has enough electoral strength to elect all 10 of them while the latter is a
list from a weaker party that expects to elect only one. To evaluate the degree of
competition candidates face within their lists, thus, we need to have some idea of
how those who put the list together expect to do in the election. In other words, we
need to have a measure of the number of seats each list expects to receive. The
degree of intra-party competition will increase with the difference between the
number of viable candidates presented in a list, and the number of candidates the
list expects to elect.
Finding such an estimate, however, is not straightforward. In line with other
researchers, we could use past success (e.g., the average number of seats received in
the past n elections) as an indicator of how a party expects to do in the current elec-
tion (Crisp et al., 2007). In a context such as that in Brazil, however, where district-
level volatility is high, an average of past performance would not be very reliable as
an indicator of future performance. The high volatility caused both by shifts in vot-
ers’ preferences and the entry and exit of parties in different districts, leads to an
artificially large number of lists that over-perform, that is, lists that elect more can-
didates than the number of candidates they present. Although this is possible (e.g.,
see the example in note 12), it is not reasonable to expect it to be frequent.
Our solution is to simply compare the number of strong candidates in a list, our
measure of viable candidates, with the number of seats a list received in the current
election. This is possible because we classify candidates as strong in the current
election on the basis of their performance in past elections; the classification, in this
sense, is exogenous to the election for which it is used. We argue that intra-party
competition is more intense, the larger the difference between the number of strong
candidates in a list and the number of candidates elected from that list. When there
are strong candidates who were not elected, it suggests that some candidates
received votes that could have gone to someone else in the list.
Table 4 contains the relevant information for the four elections for which we
can identify strong candidates. Table entries represent the absolute number of
party lists by the difference between strong candidates presented and elected, and
by the magnitude of electoral districts: small (8–12), medium (16–31), and large
(39–70). As can be seen, close to half of all party lists presented no strong candi-
dates and elected no one. Intra-party competition in these cases is either non-
existent or irrelevant.
In turn, 1,367 lists presented at least one strong candidate. Of these lists, 24%
presented exactly the number of strong candidates they elected, and 41% presented
Cheibub and Sin
83


=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
one strong candidate who was not elected. As we consider the number of viable
candidates in the list to be an indicator of the party’s expected number of seats it
will obtain, we see that 65% of the lists with at least one strong candidate are well
coordinated in the sense that they follow Cox’s (1997) rule and present at most
M + 1 viable candidates (where, following Crisp et al. (2007), M denotes the
‘party’s magnitude’). In only 10% of all lists, or 35% of the lists with at least one
competitive candidate, do we see three or more strong candidates in excess of the
number of candidates elected. These lists are clearly uncoordinated. Had the party
devoted some of the resources and efforts that went towards the multiple non-
elected candidates to only one of them, they might have been able to obtain an
additional seat. Eight per cent of the lists had two strong candidates in excess.
Whether one adds them to the set of ‘well-coordinated’ lists or not, the overall pic-
ture is not one of internecine intra-party competition.18
Note that the difference between presented and elected viable candidates varies
considerably with district magnitude. Candidates in smaller districts are less likely
to have to fight against their co-partisans than candidates in largest districts. In dis-
tricts with magnitudes between 8 and 12, 78% of all lists presented at most M + 1
candidates with M as defined above; this proportion falls to 61% in medium size
districts, and to 44% in the mega districts, those with magnitudes between 39 and
70. In turn, while only 7% of the lists in the small districts presented three or more
excess strong candidates, 40% in the mega districts did so. It may well be the case
that the widespread perception of chaotic electoral competition for the CD in
Brazil, prevalent among analysts of virtually every kind, comes from the habit of
Table 4. Number of party lists by type of list and district magnitude, Brazil, 2002–2014
District Magnitude
Type of List
All
8  DM  12
16  DM  31
39  DM  70
No strong candidates, no
candidates elected
1,275
748
388
139
As many strong candidates as
candidates elected
325
189
93
43
One more strong candidate than
the number of candidates
elected
562
306
162
94
Two more strong candidates
than the number of candidates
elected
210
98
65
47
Three or more strong
candidates than the number of
candidates elected
266
45
97
124
Fewer strong candidates than
elected
4
0
2
2
All
2,642
1,386
807
449
Source: Compiled by the authors from TSE, Brazil (http://www.tse.jus.br/eleicoes/estatisticas/repositorio-de-dados-
eleitorais-1/repositorio-de-dados-eleitorais/).
84
Journal of Theoretical Politics 32(1)


=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
projecting the electoral dynamics observed in the five mega districts to the rest of
the country. These are the most developed districts; they concentrate about 60% of
both population and economic activity and are the focus of national media atten-
tion. Their sheer magnitude makes it hard for parties to form a reliable estimate of
their strength and virtually impossible for candidates to have a good sense of where
they stand in terms of votes when compared with their co-partisans. Relatedly, vot-
ers are concentrated in large urban centers, which makes it harder for candidates to
carve, geographically or in any other way, non-overlapping constituencies. It is
possible, therefore, that the sense of extremely intense intra-party competition that
pervades analysis of CD elections in Brazil emerges from the observation of what
happens in the largest districts, which is then projected to the smaller ones.
In conclusion, a comparison of the number of strong candidates presented by
and elected from each list shows a very different picture than the one that predomi-
nates in studies of Brazilian legislative elections and of OLPR electoral systems in
general. Intra-party competition in smaller districts, at least as measured by the fre-
quency with which lists present excess strong candidates, is much more constrained
than previously realized.
5.3. Discontinuous distribution of personal votes across candidates in the same
list
The lack of intense competition inside party lists can be also demonstrated through
an examination of how personal votes are distributed across candidates in a party
list. Consider the 2014 election in the state of Santa Catarina, in southern Brazil,
where 16 seats were under dispute. The election was dominated by two broad coali-
tions and one party, the Worker’s Party (PT), which ran alone and won two seats.
One of the coalitions, C1, was composed of eight parties, and elected five candi-
dates across three of these parties: PSDB, PP, and PPS; the other coalition, C2,
contained 12 parties and received 9 seats, also distributed across three parties:
PMDB, PR, and PSD.
The distribution of votes for the candidates in the three sets of lists that received
seats in this election is presented in panels A, B, and C of Figure 3. The hollow cir-
cle in each panel represents the last candidate elected from that party. In panel A,
we see the three parties from C1 that received seats. Keeping in mind that personal
votes are expressed as a proportion of the district quota, we see that the first two
candidates in the PP received, respectively, 1:09 and 0:59Dq in personal votes, and
they were elected; the third candidate, who was not elected, received 0:02Dq in per-
sonal votes. Thus, the difference in personal votes between the last elected and the
first non-elected PP candidates was 0:57Dq. A similar situation can be observed for
the other two parties in C1: the last elected candidate for the PSDB received 0:24Dq
in personal votes, and the first non-elected received 0:06Dq; the last elected for the
PPS received 0:37Dq and the first non-elected 0:01. Thus, a sharp discontinuity can
be observed in Figure 3 in the personal votes received by the last elected and the
first non-elected candidates in the same party.
Cheibub and Sin
85


=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
A similar discontinuity exists in the second coalition, C2, composed of three par-
ties (PMDB, PR, and PSD, Figure 3 panel B). In both the PMDB and the PSD, the
discontinuity is between the personal votes of the first and second non-elected can-
didates. The PR, in turn, presented only one candidate, who was elected, thus impli-
citly implying a difference as large as that candidate’s personal vote. In Figure 3
panel C, we can observe the electoral results for the PT, which did not participate
in any coalition. The first and second candidates, both elected, had personal votes
equivalent to 0:64Dq and 0:53Dq, respectively. The third candidate, not elected,
had personal votes amounting to 0:18Dq. The difference in personal votes between
the last elected and the first non-elected candidates was, therefore, equal to 0:36Dq.
Thus, we see in panels A–C of Figure 3 that the distribution of personal votes of
candidates from the same party tend to take a sharp turn south at or around the
first non-elected candidate.
Now examine panel D of Figure 3, which depicts the distribution of personal
votes received by candidates from all 8 parties that participated in C1, and those
from the 12 parties that participated in C2. We can see that the difference between
the last elected candidate and the first and/or second non-elected candidate is con-
siderably smaller: the share of personal votes across the candidates occupying these
three relative positions is quite similar. It is not difficult to imagine that small dis-
turbances prior to the election could have led to the success of the sixth or
Figure 3. Distribution of personal votes for candidates in party and coalition lists, CD
elections, Santa Catarina, 2014. Compiled by the authors from TSE, Brazil (http://www.tse.jus.br/
eleicoes/estatisticas/repositorio-de-dados-eleitorais-1/repositorio-de-dados-eleitorais/)
86
Journal of Theoretical Politics 32(1)


=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
seventh candidates instead of the fifth in C1, or of the tenth and not the ninth can-
didate in C2.
This pattern exemplifies the different environment candidates face in party ver-
sus coalition lists. Candidates must act parametrically within the coalition: as dis-
cussed in Section 3, the coalition list is the product of the mere addition of lists
composed independently and, for political and legal reasons, are not identified as
an actor in the campaign for federal representatives, let alone one capable of strate-
gic behavior. But candidates can and do affect the lists in the parties under whose
label they run, most importantly the number of claimants on the finite party
resources. The fact that there is such a sharp discontinuity in the number of per-
sonal votes received by successful and unsuccessful candidates suggests, we believe,
Table 5. Difference in personal votes between last elected and first non-elected candidates in
coalition and party lists, Brazil, 1990–2014
Panel A
Panel B
Average across elections for each state
Average across states for each election
State
Party
Coalition
Year
Party
Coalition
AC
0.313
0.052
1990
0.160
0.046
AL
0.396
0.121
1994
0.214
0.054
AM
0.402
0.151
1998
0.285
0.096
AP
0.201
0.062
2002
0.278
0.100
BA
0.252
0.045
2006
0.307
0.098
CE
0.365
0.126
2010
0.326
0.095
DF
0.427
0.088
2014
0.384
0.090
ES
0.221
0.057
GO
0.307
0.078
MA
0.276
0.057
MG
0.206
0.037
MS
0.223
0.071
MT
0.269
0.134
PA
0.280
0.102
PB
0.341
0.119
PE
0.380
0.039
PI
0.361
0.115
PR
0.221
0.099
RJ
0.198
0.068
RN
0.499
0.171
RO
0.235
0.066
RR
0.271
0.095
RS
0.160
0.083
SC
0.246
0.043
SE
0.316
0.138
SP
0.101
0.041
TO
0.244
0.043
Source: Compiled by the authors from TSE, Brazil (http://www.tse.jus.br/eleicoes/estatisticas/repositorio-de-dados-
eleitorais-1/repositorio-de-dados-eleitorais/).
Cheibub and Sin
87


=== PDF PAGE 19 ===
that strong candidates go into the election knowing that they are fighting not their
co-partisans but members of different parties. Table 5 demonstrates that the inflec-
tion is general and larger in party lists than in coalition lists: the average differences
for party lists for each state in all elections (panel A), and for each election across
the states (Panel B), is always considerably higher than for coalition lists. To the
extent that the break in the distribution of votes from the last elected to the first
non-elected candidate denotes capacity to limit intra-list competition, we can say
with assurance that members of the same party face much more limited competi-
tion from co-partisans than members of parties in the same coalition.
We interpret the existence of a sharp discontinuity between the last elected and
the first non-elected candidate in party lists as evidence that these lists are numeri-
cally contained and that they tend to be contained at or around that point. We
would be incorrect, however, if we were to find similar differences across the per-
sonal votes of candidates located in other relative positions. Our last piece of evi-
dence, thus, is presented in Figure 4, which compares the personal votes between
candidates located at different positions in the party list. If we locate the difference
in votes between the last winner (LW) and the first loser (FL) at the center, to its
left we have the difference in personal votes between the next-to-last winner (NLW)
and the LW, and between the next to the next-to-last winner (NNLW) and NLW; to
the right are the differences between the FL and the second loser (SL), and between
the SL and the third loser (TL). If party lists are limited in the number of candidates
they contain, we should observe a curvilinear pattern in the distribution of these
differences: relatively small differences between two winning or two losing candi-
dates; large differences between a winning and a losing candidate.19 Limiting the
analysis to lists with all the positions displays a similar pattern, but significantly
Figure 4. Average difference in personal votes for pairs of candidates in the same party list by
district magnitude. Compiled by the authors from TSE, Brazil (http://www.tse.jus.br/eleicoes/
estatisticas/repositorio-de-dados-eleitorais-1/repositorio-de-dados-eleitorais/). Candidate
positions: NNLW = Next to Next to Last Winner; NLW = Next to Last Winner; LW = Last
Winner; FL = First Loser; SL = Second Loser; TL = Third Loser.
88
Journal of Theoretical Politics 32(1)


=== PDF PAGE 20 ===
reduces the number of lists. As displayed in Figure 4, the overall pattern conforms
with this expectation. Differences in the personal votes of last winners and first
losers in lists from the same party are considerably larger than the differences
between pairs to their left and right. As we had found in Section 4.2, there is a dis-
trict magnitude effect: although the pattern of discontinuity is as expected across
all districts, it is sharper in smaller districts than in larger.
6. Conclusion
In this article, we have provided evidence to the effect that, even in its most extreme
form, OLPR elections do not necessarily imply high levels of intra-party competi-
tion. Electoral campaigns will certainly be personalized since candidates need to
attract votes for themselves. However, there is nothing in this fact that requires
candidates from the same list to compete with one another for votes and that, as a
consequence, competition will degenerate into a war of all against all, with the ulti-
mate obliteration of political parties. As we have seen, the absolute number of can-
didates competing misleads the observer because over 40% of them, in a strong
and specific sense, are irrelevant: they generate so few votes that they could be
dropped out of the race without changing at all the allocation of seats. Moreover,
the number of candidates who enter an election with a reasonable expectation of
victory is small, implying a moderate level of overall competition. Finally, when we
consider the distribution of candidates inside the party lists we discover that, in
general, they contain a limited number of viable candidates and that the number of
excess candidates is small. To be sure, this pattern is less accentuated in very large
districts, but it is nonetheless significantly present, suggesting that the difficulty
emerges not so much from the ballot structure but from the extremely large magni-
tude and sheer number of voters in the district.
It is important to mention that candidates can be different not only because they
have different number of personal votes, but also because they seek votes in differ-
ent constituencies and, thus, do not really compete for the same pool of voters.
Candidates in the same list can seek votes in different areas of the district; they can
also seek the vote of constituencies that, even if not geographically concentrated,
are qualitatively different (e.g., issue-oriented voters). Thus, apart from the finding
that party lists are populated by a relatively small number of strong candidates, it
might be possible that even that small number of candidates draw votes from dif-
ferent constituencies spread across the district. We develop this idea in another
paper.
Electoral systems that cultivate incentives for candidates to emphasize the per-
sonal vote do not necessarily imply autophagic competition among co-partisans
and the obliteration of political parties. Yes, OLPR (and other forms of preferen-
tial PR) does make elections more focused on individual candidates. However, the
competition within parties happens prior to the election, with both parties and can-
didates making sure that two candidates from the same party join forces to attract
votes that otherwise would have gone to a different party, rather than fighting for
the votes that one or the other would have received. Our findings have implications
Cheibub and Sin
89


=== PDF PAGE 21 ===
for the kinds of linkages politicians and voters establish in preferential PR systems,
for the behavior of politicians once they are elected, and for the role of electoral
institutions on the nature of public policies. They question the causal chain that
connects incentives for personal votes to intra-party competition, weak political
parties, and adverse policy outcomes.
Acknowledgements
We thank audience members and discussants for useful feedback during ALACIP, APSA,
EPSA, and MPSA meetings. We would also like to thank for their comments the participants
at seminars and workshops at Hebrew University, Oxford University, Peace University
Institute, Texas A&M University, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, University of
Massachusetts at Amherst, and University of Virginia. We received useful feedback from
many individuals but we are especially grateful to Gustavo Diaz Diaz Romero, Magna
Ina´ cio, Roni Lehrer, Alejandro Medina, Milan Svolik, and Dawid Tatarczyk. Gisela Sin
would like to thank the Lemann Institute for Brazilian Studies at the University of Illinois
for their generous support. We would like to extend special thanks to Guy Whitten and the
European Union Center at Texas A&M University for supporting one of the workshops in
preparation for this special issue. Finally, we thank the authors in this special issue for their
feedback during these workshops and the suggestions by two anonymous referees.
Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, author-
ship and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship and/or publication
of this article.
ORCID iD
Jose´ Antonio Cheibub
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9732-4922
Notes
1.
In addition to closed and open, PR lists can be flexible. In these systems, parties rank
candidates prior to elections but voters can cast a preference vote for specific candi-
dates in the list. Candidates receiving a certain number of preference votes are elected,
regardless of their rank in the list produced by the party. The number of votes neces-
sary to upset the party ranking varies considerably across systems, but is usually a pro-
portion of the total number of votes received by the party or of the quota necessary to
elect a candidate in the district. In most existing systems, voters rarely upset the rank-
ing of candidates produced by the party, although there is evidence that personal votes
are becoming more important (Reinwick and Pilet, 2016).
2.
See, among others, Bergman et al. (2013), Norris (2006), Willis et al. (1999: 21), Carey
and Shugart (1995), and Geddes and Ribeiro Neto (1992).
90
Journal of Theoretical Politics 32(1)


=== PDF PAGE 22 ===
3.
Ames and Power (2007: 191) state that the Brazilian OLPR system ‘encourages fierce
struggles not only among different parties, but also between candidates from the same
party.’ For Mainwaring (1995: 395), ‘to get elected, candidates often compete with their
own party members more than they compete with candidates of other parties;’ Nicolau
(2006: 700) believes that ‘candidates see as their main rivals colleagues from the same
list rather than from other parties’ [our translation]; Geddes and Ribeiro Neto (1992:
649) make reference to a remark by Francisco Weffort, a political scientist and eventual
politician, to the effect that ‘the open-list system pits candidates of the same party
against each other;’ Power (2000: 28) believes that Brazilian ‘open-list PR is fratricidal.’
4.
A non-exhaustive list includes: relatively low levels of public goods provision (Shugart,
1999); narrowly targeted public policy (Lizzeri and Persico, 2001; Milesi-Ferretti et al.,
2002); relatively high levels of corruption (Chang, 2005; Geddes and Ribeiro Neto,
1992; Golden, 2003); relatively low levels of corruption (Kunicova´
and Rose-
Ackerman, 2005; Persson et al., 2003), or different types of corruption (Gingerich,
2013); gender imbalance (Jones and Navia, 1999); distributive politics (Franchino and
Mainenti, 2013); higher budget deficits (Hallergerg and Marier, 2004); inefficient public
spending (Hicken and Simmons, 2008); bilateral investment treaties and foreign direct
investment (Crisp et al., 2010; Garland and Biglaiser, 2008); vote buying (Hicken,
2007); agricultural subsidies (Park and Jensen, 2007); and economic reform (Bagashka,
2012).
5.
Malapportionment in the CD comes primarily from a constitutional rule imposing a
floor and a ceiling on the formula for determining the magnitude of the district: regard-
less of population, no district may have fewer than 8 or more than 70 seats. There are
no adjustments of seats due to population shifts. The last time a change occurred was
in 1993, when the size of the CD increased from 503 to 513, with the additional 10 seats
going to Sa˜ o Paulo. In 2013 the court in charge of elections (the Tribunal Superior
Eleitoral or TSE) attempted to adjust the number of seats on the basis of the 2010 cen-
sus. States challenged the TSE decision in the federal high court (Supremo Tribunal
Federal), which reversed the changes, arguing that they could only be made on the
basis of constitutional (complementar) legislation (Zampier, 2013).
6.
See Carneiro (2009) for examples of how parties form candidate lists in the state of Rio
de Janeiro.
7.
These were in Amapa´ (1990), Brası´lia (two in 1990, one in 1998, two in 2014), Paraı´ba
(1990), Rondonia (2014), and Roraima (2014). For reasons we could not discover, four
coalitions in 1990 (Roraima, Sa˜ o Paulo, and two in Rio de Janeiro) presented more
candidates than they should have been allowed.
8.
For a review of the literature on the incentives of large and small parties to coalesce in
elections for the CD see Calvo, Guarnieri, and Limongi (2015), Schmitt (2005) and
Mesquita (2016).
9.
Consider, for example, Bergman et al. (2013: 322): ‘A seat-maximizing party under
OLPR is indifferent to the distribution of votes across its candidates, meaning we can
expect laissez faire competition: nominate the maximum allowable number of candi-
dates, and let them compete freely.’
10.
All the data in this article come from Tribunal Superior Eleitoral, Brasil. Data for 1994
are incomplete. The TSE has withdrawn the data that used to be available and has re-
released information for only 15 of the 27 districts.
11.
In this exercise, we started by allocating the seats in the district as they actually hap-
pened. We did that according to the rules that governed each election, which means that
we used the coalition lists, when relevant, as the recipient of seats; we then allocated the
Cheibub and Sin
91


=== PDF PAGE 23 ===
seats to individual members of the list. For 12 of the 177 districts, we were not able to
exactly replicate the final allocation of seats, although the outcome was very close. We
did not include these districts here.
12.
Recall that 28,618 candidates competed between 1990 and 2014. Excluding the candi-
dates in the 12 districts we could not replicate, leaves 25,588 candidates, of which
14,996 were found to be irrelevant. Therefore, the personal votes received by 10,592
candidates mattered for the final allocation of seats.
13.
Owing to data limitations, our ‘history’ only goes back as far as 1998. Thus, candidates
who ran in 2002 had histories defined by their participation and performance in the 1998
and 2000 elections; candidates who ran in 2006 had histories defined by their participation
and performance in the 1998, 2000, 2002, and 2004 elections; etc. In creating these his-
tories, in addition to the national elections that happened up to 2014, we also considered
the local elections of 2000, 2004, 2008, 2012, and 2016. There were 69 candidates in these
elections for whom we were not able to find information about their participation and
performance in previous elections. In total, therefore, Table 3 and the analysis in Section
5.2 refer to the 19,908 who participated in the four elections between 2002 and 2014.
14.
The one case not classified as strong among the 212 who were first elected at t comes
from the list presented by the PRONA in Sa˜ o Paulo in 2002. This candidate received
0.15% of a district quota in personal votes and was elected in the tail of Ene´ as
Carneiro, who obtained 5.6 district quotas in personal votes, thus automatically elect-
ing himself and four of his co-partisans. The other three received similarly low levels of
personal votes, but had never participated in any election before. A fifth candidate,
also an electoral novice who received 0.01% of a district quota in personal votes, was
elected in the remainder distribution.
15.
The four exceptions are explained in the previous note. The majority of novices who
were not elected when they ran performed poorly in the elections they had participated
in: 50% of them received less than 0.6% of a district quota in personal votes; 90% of
them received less than 8% of a district quota.
16.
Mesquita’s list is only marginally different from other classifications of large parties,
e.g., Guarnieri (2011) and Braga (2006).
17.
Parties in Brazil, as in other places, differ in the way they are organized, some more cen-
tralized than others. This is clearly something that might affect their ability to control
the list and prevent entry of excess candidates. Unfortunately, addressing this possibil-
ity is impossible given the state of our knowledge about how parties in Brazil are orga-
nized. The best and most complete study of party organization in Brazil is by Guarnieri
(2011), which is limited to only seven parties. Since there may be variation in the way
parties operate at the district level when it comes to list composition, it is not possible
to extend Guarnieri’s classification of parties to the whole country.
18.
There are at least two possible reasons for lists in Brazil to overshoot the number of strong
candidates. One is that there is a non-trivial number of seats (close to 15% in the average
district) that are allocated through the (largest average) remainder distribution. Second,
many candidates are not initially elected but end up serving some significant amount of
time as an elected representative. Many of those who were initially elected leave when they
join the government as a minister or as a member of an executive or judicial agency, or
run in mayoral elections that take place in the second year of their mandate. When this
happens, the next candidate in the list takes the seat. We know of no systematic studies
about these candidates, except that the number is considered to be high.
19.
The number of cases in each pair differs because not all lists have candidates in all
positions.
92
Journal of Theoretical Politics 32(1)


=== PDF PAGE 24 ===
References
Ames B and Power TJ (2007) Parties and governability in Brazil. In: Webb P and White S
(eds) Party Politics in New Democracies. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 179–212.
Bagashka T (2012) The personal votes and economic reform. Electoral Studies 31(3):
562–575.
Bergman ME, Shugart MS and Watt KA (2013) Patterns of intra-party competition in open-
list and SNTV systems. Electoral Studies 32: 321–333.
Braga MdSS (2006) O processo partida´rio-eleitoral brasileiro: Padro˜es de competicxa˜o polı´tica.
Sa˜ o Paulo: Associacxa˜ o Editorial Humanitas.
Calvo E, Guarnieri F and Limongi F (2015) Why coalitions: Party system fragmentation,
small party bias, and preferential vote in Brazil. Electoral Studies 39: 219–229.
Carey JM and Shugart MS (1995) Incentives to cultivate a personal vote: A rank ordering of
electoral formulas. Electoral Studies 14(4): 417–439.
Carneiro AR (2009) Processo de selecxa˜o de candidatos ao cargo de deputado federal no estado
do Rio de Janeiro: Organizando as ‘pecxas’ do ‘‘quebra-cabecxa’’. PhD Thesis, Instituto
Universita´ rio de Pesquisas do Rio de Janeiro (IUPERJ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Carroll R and Nalepa M (2020) The personal vote and party cohesion: Modeling the effects
of electoral rules on intraparty politics. Journal of Theoretical Politics 32(1): 36–69.
Chang ECC (2005) Electoral incentives for political corruption under open-list proportional
representation. The Journal of Politics 67(3): 716–730.
Colomer JM (2011) Introduction: Party and personal representation. In: Colomer JM (ed)
Personal Representation: The Neglected Dimension of Electoral Systems. ECPR Press, pp.
1–20.
Cox GW (1997) Making Votes Vount: Strategic Coordination in the World’s Electoral
Systems. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Crisp BF, Jensen K and Shomer Y (2007) Magnitude and vote seeking. Electoral Studies 26:
727–734.
Crisp BF, Jensen NM, Rosas G and Zeitzoff T (2010) Vote-seeking incentives and
investment
environments:
The
need
for
credit
claiming
and
the
provision
of
protectionism. Electoral Studies 29: 221–226.
Crisp BF, Olivella S, Malecki M and Sher M (2013) Vote-earning strategies in flexible list
systems: Seats at the price of unity. Electoral Studies 32: 658–669.
Espı´rito-Santo A and Sanches ER (2018) Looking for locals under a closed-list proportional
representation system: The case of Portugal. Electoral Studies 52: 117–127.
Folke O, Persson T and Rickne J (2016) The primary effect: Preference votes and political
promotions. American Political Science Review 110(3): 559–578.
Folke O and Rickne J (2020) Preference votes: Accountability at the price of cohesion?
Journal of Theoretical Politics 32(1): 11–35.
Franchino F and Mainenti M (2013) Electoral institutions and distributive policies in
parliamentary systems: An application to state aid measures in eu countries. West
European Politics 36(3): 498–520.
Garland MW and Biglaiser G (2008) Do electoral rules matter? Political institutions and
foreign direct investment in Latin America. Comparative Political Studies 42(2): 224–251.
Geddes B and Ribeiro Neto A (1992) Institutional sources of corruption in Brazil. Third
World Quarterly 13(4): 641–662.
Gingerich D (2013) Political Institutions and Party-directed Corruption in South America:
Stealing for the Team. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cheibub and Sin
93


=== PDF PAGE 25 ===
Golden MA (2003) Electoral connections: The effects of the personal vote on political
patronage, bureaucracy and legislation in postwar italy. British Journal of Political
Science 33: 189–212.
Guarnieri F (2011) A forcxa dos partidos fracos. Dados 54(1): 235–258.
Hallergerg M and Marier P (2004) Executive authority, the personal vote and budget
discipline in Latin American and Caribbean countries. American Journal of Political
Science 48(3): 571–587.
Hicken A (2007) How do rules and institutions encourage vote buying? In: Elections for
Sale: The Causes and Consequences of Vote-buying. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, pp. 47–
60.
Hicken A and Simmons JW (2008) The personal vote and the efficacy of education spending.
American Journal of Political Science 52(1): 109–124.
Jones MP and Navia P (1999) Gender quotas, electoral laws, and the election of women:
Assessing the effectiveness of quotas in open list proportional representation electoral
systems. Social Science Quarterly 80: 341–355.
Kunicova´ J and Rose-Ackerman S (2005) Electoral rules and constitutional structures as
constraints on corruption. British Journal of Political Science 35(4): 573–606.
Latner M and McGann A (2005) Geographical representation under proportional
representation: The cases of Israel and the Netherlands. Electoral Studies 24: 709–734.
Limongi F and Cortez R (2010) As eleicxo˜ es de 2010 e o quadro partida´ rio. Novos Estudos 88:
21–37.
Lizzeri A and Persico N (2001) The provision of public goods under alternative electoral
incentives. American Economic Review 91(1): 225–245.
Mainwaring S (1995) Brazil: Weak parties, feckless democracy. In: Mainwaring S and Scully
TR (eds) Building Democratic Institutions: Party Systems in Latin America. Palo Alto,
CA: Stanford University Press, pp. 354–398.
Manin B (1997) The Principles of Representative Government. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Melo CR (2014) The 2014 elections and the Brazilian party system. Brazilian Political
Science Review 9(1): 93–114.
Mershon C (2020) Challenging the wisdom on preferential proportional representation.
Journal of Theoretical Politics 32(1): 168–182.
Mesquita L (2016) Coordenacxa˜o eleitoral no Brasil: O papel dos partidos polı´ticos. PhD
Thesis, Universidade Estadual do Rio de Janeiro, IUPERJ, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Milesi-Ferretti GM, Perotti R and Rostagno M (2002) Electoral systems and public
spending. Quaterly Journal of Economics 117(2): 609–657.
Mitchell P (2000) Voters and their representatives: Electoral institutions and delegation in
parliamentary democracies. European Journal of Political Research 37: 335–351.
Nemoto K and Shugart MS (2013) Localism and coordination under three different electoral
systems: The national district of the Japanese House of Councilors. Electoral Studies
32(1): 1–12.
Nicoalu J (2006) O sistema eleitoral de lista aberta no brasil. Dados 49(4): 689–720.
Norris P (2006) Recruitment. In: Katz R and Crotty W (eds) Handbook of Party Politics.
London: SAGE Publications, pp. 89–108.
Park JH and Jensen N (2007) Electoral competition and agricultural support in OECD
countries. American Journal of Political Science 51(2): 314–329.
Persson T, Tabellini G and Trebbi F (2003) Electoral rules and corruption. Journal of the
European Economic Association 1(4): 958–989.
94
Journal of Theoretical Politics 32(1)


=== PDF PAGE 26 ===
Power TJ (2000) Political institutions in democratic Brazil: Politics as a permanent
constitutional convention. In: Democratic Brazil: Actors, institutions, and processes.
Pittsburgh, PA: Pittsburgh University Press, pp. 17–35.
Reinwick A and Pilet JB (2016) Faces on the Ballot: The Personalization of Electoral Systems
in Europe. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sanches ER and Espı´rito-Santo A (2016) Cabecxas de lista a` s eleicxo˜ es legislativas portuguesas:
Lacxos locais ou visibilidade nacional? Ana´lise Social 220: 659–683.
Schmitt R (2005) Os estudos sobre aliancxas ee coligacxo˜ es eleitorais na cieˆ ncia polı´tica
brasileira. In: Krause S and Schmitt R (eds) Partidos e coligacxo˜es eleitorais no Brasil.
Fundacxa˜ o Editora da UNESP, pp. 11–26.
Shugart MS (1999) Presidentialism, parliamentarism, and the provision of collective goods
in less-developed countries. Constitutional Political Economy 10: 53–88.
Shugart MS, Valdini ME and Suominen K (2005) Looking for locals: Voter information
demands
and
personal
vote-earning
attributes
of
legislators
under
proportional
representation. American Journal of Political Science 49(2): 437–449.
Swindle SM (2002) The supply and demand of the personal vote: Theoretical considerations
and empirical implications of collective electoral incentives. Party Politics 8(3): 279–300.
TSE TSE (2012) Co´digo eleitoral anotado e legislacxa˜o complementar. 10th Ed. Tribunal
Superior Eleitoral, Secretaria de Gesta˜ o da Informacxa˜ o, Brası´lia.
Willis E, Garman C and Haggard S (1999) The politics of decentralization in Latin America.
Latin American Research Review 34(1): 7–56.
Zampier D (2013) TSE muda representacxa˜ o de estados na caˆ mara dos deputados. Available
at:
http://www.ebc.com.br/noticias/brasil/2013/04/tse-muda-representacao-de-estados-
na-camara-dos-deputados.
Cheibub and Sin
95
