=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
Journal of Public Economics 234 (2024) 105133
Available online 27 April 2024
0047-2727/© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Public Economics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jpube
The gatekeeper’s dilemma: Political selection or team effort✩
Jon H. Fiva a, Federica Izzo b, Janne Tukiainen c,d,∗
a Department of Economics, BI Norwegian Business School, Norway
b Department of Political Science, University of California San Diego, United States of America
c Department of Economics, Turku School of Economics, University of Turku, Rehtorinpellonkatu 3, FI-20014, Finland
d VATT Institute for Economic Research, Arkadiankatu 7, Helsinki FI-00101, Finland
A R T I C L E
I N F O
JEL classification:
C21
D72
Keywords:
Intra-party politics
Flexible party lists
Campaigning
Moral hazard
Seniority norms
Bargaining
A B S T R A C T
Political parties play a crucial gatekeeping role in elections, including controlling electoral resources, candidate
recruitment, and electoral list compositions. In making these strategic choices, parties aim to encourage
candidates to invest in the campaign, while also trying to secure advantages for their preferred candidates.
We study how parties navigate this trade-off using a specific feature of the Norwegian local electoral system
in which parties can give advantaged positions to some candidates in an otherwise open list. Our theory
reveals that parties’ ex-ante electoral strength impacts their strategic decisions. Notably, the trade-off is
weaker for more popular parties, allowing them to facilitate the election of their preferred candidates without
compromising the party’s overall performance. We show empirically that the moral hazard concern is real, and
that larger parties are indeed more likely to use their power to make some candidates safe. The advantage
of large parties extends further: safeguarding specific candidates enables parties to achieve disproportionately
favorable outcomes in post-electoral bargaining. These findings reveal new insights for political representations,
policy outcomes, and intra-party dynamics more broadly.
1. Introduction
Political parties are often considered as the cornerstone of democ-
racy (Stokes, 1999). Among their vital roles is that of gatekeepers
in the political selection process. Parties wield control over electoral
resources and candidate recruitment, shape the composition of electoral
lists, influence the internal competition for seats and the allocation of
electoral rents.
In navigating these strategic choices, political parties face a dual
objective. On one hand, party leaders aim to incentivize individual
candidates’ behavior, in order to get them to contribute to the party’s
goals and invest in costly campaign efforts (e.g., Invernizzi and Prato,
2023). On the other hand, parties may seek to exercise their gate-
keeping power to secure advantages or positions for their preferred
candidates (e.g., Buisseret and Prato, 2022). These objectives often
present a challenging trade-off, as they may be hard to achieve at the
same time.
This paper investigates how political parties resolve this trade-off.
We study, both theoretically and empirically, under which conditions
✩We thank Ali Cirone, Benoit Crutzen, Ben Geys, Nikitas Konstantinidis, Carlo Prato, Rune SøRensen, Stephane Wolton for useful comments and Anna Ristilä for
excellent research assistance. Fiva gratefully acknowledges financial support from The Research Council of Norway (grant no. 314079). Tukiainen acknowledges
funding by the European Research Council (ERC, INTRAPOL, 101045239). Views and opinions expressed are however those of the authors only and do not
necessarily reflect those of the EU or the ERC. Neither EU nor ERC can be held responsible.
∗Corresponding author at: Department of Economics, Turku School of Economics, University of Turku, Rehtorinpellonkatu 3, FI-20014, Finland.
E-mail addresses: jon.h.fiva@bi.no (J.H. Fiva), fizzo@ucsd.edu (F. Izzo), janne.tukiainen@utu.fi (J. Tukiainen).
party leaders privilege maximizing the candidates’ incentives for effort
and when instead they choose a strategy that emphasizes selection
(of their preferred candidates). Our main contribution is to show that
parties’ ex-ante electoral strength crucially influences their strategic
calculus in this domain. In particular, we uncover an important regu-
larity. The aforementioned tradeoff is weaker for ex-ante more popular
parties. These parties can adopt strategies that protect or advantage
their preferred members, without compromising the party’s collective
performance. Thus, more popular parties can have their proverbial cake
and eat it too.
Empirically investigating this trade-off and understanding how par-
ties strategically address it presents numerous challenges. Political
parties are often unwilling to disclose information about their internal
dynamics, to the extent that political scientists have labeled parties’
objectives and internal organization as the ‘‘black box’’ or ‘‘secret
garden’’ of politics (Field and Siavelis, 2008; Hazan and Rahat, 2010;
Gallagher and Marsh, 1988).
This paper circumvents this issue by capitalizing on a particular
feature of the Norwegian local electoral system. In Norway, local
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2024.105133
Received 2 July 2022; Received in revised form 14 April 2024; Accepted 16 April 2024


=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
Journal of Public Economics 234 (2024) 105133
2
J.H. Fiva et al.
elections are decided by a flexible list system, where voters can express
their preference for individual politicians (as in open-list systems), but
parties can choose to assign an advantaged position to some of their
candidates (similarly to a closed-list system). The candidates that are
placed in an advantaged spot receive a ‘bonus’ amount of personal
preference votes. This boost is so large that it is extremely hard for
a non-advantaged candidate to compete with the advantaged ones in
the intra-party contest.
By strategically allocating advantaged positions, local parties can
therefore regulate the intensity of the internal contest for seats. As
such, parties may fall victim of the trade-off that we discussed above.
If this trade-off is binding, parties must choose between an allocation
strategy that maximizes individual candidates’ incentives to contribute
to the party’s collective performance and one that seeks to shield their
favored candidates from competition. This context thus offers a unique
opportunity for us to delve into the gatekeeper’s dilemma.
To this aim, we first introduce a stylized model to study parties’
strategic problem in this setting. Party leaders care about maximizing
the number of seats won, but they also value the possibility to manage
the political selection process by securing positions for specific can-
didates in the list. In the model, the allocation of seats to the party
is a function of its ex-ante electoral strength, as well as individual
candidates’ effort. The assignment of seats within the party is a function
of candidates’ effort and the allocation of advantaged positions. Here,
party leaders face a moral hazard problem, since individual candidates
care solely about their own chances of winning a seat, rather than the
party’s overall performance. Crucially, the intensity of this problem will
be endogenous to the party’s strategic choice. In fact, the number of
advantaged positions allocated by the leadership fundamentally alters
the candidates’ incentives to exert costly campaign effort in this setting.
Our analysis proceeds in two steps. First, our model confirms the
existence of the gatekeeper’s dilemma: while the leadership may want
to strategically allocate advantages in order to insulate some candidates
from competition and guarantee them a seat, the total amount of cam-
paign effort is maximized when no advantaged positions are assigned.
Thus, the party leader cannot both maximize incentives for effort and
protect its preferred candidates at the same time.
Second, we show that ex-ante more popular parties have a strategic
advantage in navigating this tradeoff. The intuition is as follows. When
certain candidates are shielded from internal competition (i.e., receive
an advantage that guarantees them a seat),1 only those without this
advantage may have incentives to exert effort in order to win the
internal contest for seats. Yet, these non-advantaged candidates stand
a chance of securing a position only if the party wins more seats
than the number of advantaged candidates in the list (because the
seats are allocated first to the advantaged candidates). If a party is ex-
ante electorally stronger, for example because its ideological stances
are more popular with the electorate, the number of seats it may
expect to win is higher (everything else being equal). In principle,
this may increase or decrease the equilibrium effort choice of the non-
advantaged candidates, given the complex set of incentives arising in
the model. For instance, a higher number of available prizes reduces
the necessity of winning the intraparty contest that governs the alloca-
tion of seats amongst non-advantaged candidates, thereby diminishing
the motivation to exert effort. On the other hand, the availability of
more prizes offers these candidates the opportunity to secure one by
achieving a sufficiently high rank in the internal competition, without
the need to be the top contender. This possibility, in turn, enhances the
incentives to invest effort. Our analysis shows that the second effect
1 Formally, the number of advantaged candidates is smaller than the
minimum number of seats the party expects to win.
dominates. Fixing the number of advantaged candidates, the incentive
for non-advantaged candidates to exert effort grows with the party’s ex-
ante electoral popularity. A similar effect emerges under open-list, but
there the marginal impact of increasing the party’s strength is reduced
by the fact that internal competition is more intense. As a consequence,
ex-ante more popular parties can protect their preferred candidates
without significantly dampening the other candidates’ incentives to
exert effort, and thus without sacrificing the party’s overall electoral
performance. Therefore the likelihood that, in equilibrium, a party
assigns advantages to protect some of its candidates and guarantee
them a seat increases in the party’s initial electoral strength.
With these predictions at hand, we turn to the data. First, we verify
that political candidates respond to the incentives arising under the
different list structures as predicated in the model. We show that,
as expected, candidates exert more effort, proxied by their personal
vote share or media presence, when their advantaged status does not
guarantee them a seat compared to when it does. This reassures us
that the moral hazard problem we hypothesize is indeed empirically
relevant. Next, we show that the data support our main prediction
on the equilibrium allocation of advantaged positions. The likelihood
of a party choosing an allocation that insulates some candidates from
competition (at the expenses of effort and thus seats) is increasing in its
ex-ante electoral strength. These results are robust to several controls
and different empirical specifications. Importantly, further analysis also
suggests that the hypothesized mechanism underlies these empirical
patterns.
Next, we investigate how a party’s ability to advantage their pre-
ferred candidates impacts the party’s post-electoral outcomes. Natu-
rally, we cannot directly compare post-electoral outcomes for parties
employing different allocation strategies because this choice is en-
dogenous to the party’s initial strength. Instead, we identify specific
candidate traits that political parties typically prioritize, but that do
not align with voters’ preferences. This enables us to examine how
protecting candidates with these characteristics, who would otherwise
face greater challenges in securing a seat, impacts a party’s success in
the post-electoral bargaining process.
We then proceed in two steps. First, by comparing voter preferences
with parties’ strategic allocation of advantages, we find that voters
tend to be less inclined toward women candidates, but parties tend
to prioritize these candidates when assigning advantageous positions.
Furthermore, while both voters and parties tend to favor incumbents,
the effect of incumbency and further seniority on the likelihood of
securing an advantageous position within the party is more substantial
than the effect on vote share.
Secondly, when examining the consequences of electing candidates
with these particular traits, we discover that as the proportion of
elected incumbents and women increases, political parties tend to
achieve more influential nominations and positions in the municipal
government. As such, these findings underscore that the ability to shield
certain candidates from competition and ensure their election can
significantly boost the party’s influence in the post-electoral bargaining
and policymaking process.
Even more broadly, our key finding that more popular parties are
more likely to insulate some candidates from competition and secure
them a seat has implications beyond the electoral realm. We know
from a large empirical literature that the individual qualities of political
leaders can have an important impact on municipalities’ or countries’
economic performance (Besley et al., 2011; Carreri and Payson, 2023;
Meriläinen, 2022). As such, parties’ ability to advantage candidates
with specific characteristics is far from inconsequential, particularly
if larger parties are more inclined to adopt this strategy (since their
candidates are more likely to obtain positions of power). From a welfare
perspective, this result presents a dual perspective. On one hand,
if these more influential parties can more easily deviate from voter
preferences in the selection process, this raises concern for substantive
representation. On the other hand, if parties have better information on


=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
Journal of Public Economics 234 (2024) 105133
3
J.H. Fiva et al.
candidate quality and use their leverage to select leaders better able
to govern (Buisseret et al., 2022), this may ultimately benefit voter
welfare. Delving into these welfare questions and identifying conditions
under which the net effect leans in one direction or the other represents
a promising avenue for future research.
While this paper focuses on the strategies employed by political
parties within flexible electoral systems, the theoretical insights we
have uncovered hold broader relevance. Political parties wield their
gatekeeping power across various domains. This power extends to con-
trolling electoral resources, shaping the composition of electoral lists,
managing internal competition for seats, and allocating electoral rents.
For example, when deciding how to allocate electoral resources (Sny-
der, 1989), parties may opt for equal distribution among all candidates
or choose to grant advantages selectively. In open-list systems, parties
can tilt the balance in favor of their preferred candidates by construct-
ing less competitive candidate lists, or they may seek a more balanced
competition (Cheibub and Sin, 2020). Similarly, in closed-list systems,
parties face a strategic choice of whether to position their strongest
candidates at the top or in the middle of the list (Buisseret et al., 2022;
Cox et al., 2021; Crutzen et al., 2024). All these decision points involve
incentives similar to those captured in our model, transcending the
specifics of any single electoral system and offering valuable insights
into the broader dynamics of party politics.
In all these diverse contexts, our theory points to the strategic
advantage of electorally stronger political parties. These parties can
promote their preferred candidates without jeopardizing their overall
electoral performance. This, in turn, potentially provides additional
strategic advantages in the post-electoral process.
Our findings thus suggest a dynamic according to which ex-ante
more popular parties effectively leverage their strength to further con-
solidate their influence within the political landscape. As such, and
especially in relation to parties’ tendency to protect incumbents, our
results underscore a critical connection between the concentration of
power within parties and its distribution across parties. Mitigating
parties’ gatekeeping power, for example by imposing opening the can-
didate selection process or list composition, or regulating electoral
resources, is important not only as it improves intra-party democracy,
but also to preserve the competitiveness of the system as a whole.
2. Related literature
Our theory starts from the assumption that the party leadership
faces a moral hazard problem vis-a-vis individual candidates. As such,
our paper connects first and foremost to the literature on moral hazard
in teams (Holmström, 1982), especially within the context of electoral
competition (see Crutzen and Sahuguet, 2023a for a review). Crutzen
and Sahuguet (2023b) analyze different electoral rules and demonstrate
that the candidate selection process (e.g., a primary) is an important
source of incentives to campaign, as in our case. They assume that
parties care solely about maximizing effort. In contrast, our contribu-
tion is to study the trade-off between inducing effort and controlling
political selection. Crutzen et al. (2024) develop a model with a similar
trade-off between selection and campaigning, but analyze closed-list
PR, where parties must choose how to rank their candidates on the list.
Their focus is specifically on how media coverage, candidates’ desire
to access post-electoral high offices, and polarization influence how
parties rank candidates. In our case, parties choose the type of list, and
we study how their electoral strength influences their strategic choice
in navigating the trade-off.
Other related papers also consider settings where parties exercise
their gatekeeping power and influence candidate selection. For ex-
ample, in Galasso and Nannicini (2011) parties field loyal but less
competent candidates in safe districts and competent but less loyal
candidates in more competitive ones; in Buisseret et al. (2022) parties
respond to strategic voters, and face a trade-off between maximizing
votes and ensuring a high quality of governance. However, in these
papers candidates have different types and take no strategic action. Our
focus on candidates’ effort choice complements these works.
Our paper also connects to the literature on endogenous electoral
institutions (Achury et al., 2017; Aghion et al., 2004; Leemann and
Mares, 2014), where the observation is that parties themselves make
the rules under which they compete. Typically, all parties in the same
system are subject to same rule. Instead, the specific context we focus
on offers a rare opportunity, as each party chooses independently how
much flexibility to embed in its electoral list (moving from a fully open
list where no advantages are assigned, to an allocation that resembles
closed lists with some candidates fully insulated from competition).
Thus, we can observe a wide variation in parties’ choices even within
the same local context, allowing us to more easily approach ‘all else
equal’ comparisons in our empirical analysis.
It is worth noting that our focus on list flexibility is in line with
recent theoretical and empirical literature emphasizing how the ballot
structure shapes electoral competition, the behavior of candidates,
political selection, and intraparty politics (Buisseret and Prato, 2022;
Buisseret et al., 2022; Carroll and Nalepa, 2020; Cox et al., 2021;
Crutzen et al., 2020, 2024; Galasso and Nannicini, 2011; Hangartner
et al., 2019; Kselman, 2020). Moreover, we provide evidence support-
ing the party politics literature view that control over the type of
candidates elected is valuable to the parties (Bawn et al., 2012; Cohen
et al., 2008; Eriksson and Vernby, 2021; McCarty and Schickler, 2018),
as well as the recent works on seniority-based nomination norms in
politics (e.g., Cirone et al., 2021; Cox and Nowacki, 2023; Epstein et al.,
1997; McKelvey and Riezman, 1992).
More broadly, previous literature regarding how election systems
interact with the advantage of larger parties has focused mainly on
the mechanical relationship between vote shares and seat shares and to
what extent various election rules favor the larger parties (Benoit, 2000;
Herron et al., 2018). Our insight that ex-ante more popular parties have
a further advantage in managing political selection is to our knowledge
novel.
3. Institutional setting
Before delving into the analysis, it is important to provide further
details on the institutional setting we will be considering in both our
formal and empirical analyses.
The Norwegian population of about 5.4 million is divided into 356
municipalities (2020).2 These municipalities (local governments) are
important entities of the welfare state with responsibilities for many
core public services, such as education and primary health care. In
total, municipalities employ about 17% of the total labor force. Each
local government is run by a municipal council of 11 to 77 members.
Local elections take place every fourth year.3
The Norwegian list-based electoral system works as follows. Voters
cast a ballot for one of the parties and, if they want, express their
preferences for individual candidates. Voters can give a personal vote
2 A municipal amalgamation reform, passed by parliament in June 2015,
lead to a reduction in the number of municipalities from 428 to 356 over
the following four years. The local election in 2019 used the post-reform
municipality structure in place from January 2020.
3 Norwegian politics is dominated by seven political parties, which can
be classified as left-leaning (Labor Party (A); Socialist Left Party (SV)), center
(Center Party (SP); Christian Peoples’ Party (KRF); Liberal Party (V)) or right-
leaning (Conservative Party (H); Progress Party (FRP)). Appendix Table C.1
provides descriptive statistics at the municipality-level for these parties in the
2019 elections. The Labor Party and the Center Party are the largest parties,
and present lists in almost all municipalities. On average, they win 28–29
percent of the seats in the municipalities where they run. With an average
council size of about 26 members, this translates into about 7 seats.


=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
Journal of Public Economics 234 (2024) 105133
4
J.H. Fiva et al.
to as many candidates as they like.4 Seats are allocated across parties
based on the modified Sainte-Laguë method.5 The allocation of seats
within parties is instead decided based on an index which depends on
both voter and party choices. The election system allows parties to give
some of their candidates a ‘‘head start’’ (advantage), that increments
their personal vote-share by adding 25% of the total number of votes
received by the party.6 More precisely, denote as 𝑃𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑙candidate 𝑖’s
advantage-adjusted personal preference vote-share. We have that:
𝑃𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑙=
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
𝑃𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑉𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑖
if 𝑖has no advantage
𝑃𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑉𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑖+ 0.25 ⋅𝑃𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑦𝑉𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑙
if 𝑖has a advantage for list 𝑙.
(1)
𝑃𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑙then determines the candidates’ post-ballot ranking, and
therefore, the order in which they are elected. In practice, the head-
start is so large that it is extremely hard for non-advantaged candidates
to compete with advantaged candidates.7
The maximum number of candidates that a party can give an advan-
tage to depends on the size of the local council, although for the vast
majority of party lists the restriction is not binding.8 Parties can choose
any number between zero and the maximum. The decision over how
many advantaged positions to allocate, and to whom, is taken by local
parties’ nomination committees. The candidates with an advantage
are listed in boldface on the top of the ballot. The initial ranking of
candidates does not otherwise play any formal role, except if there is
a tie. In our empirical analysis, we focus on the 2019 local elections,
where the median number of advantaged candidates is two.9 However,
there is considerable variation across municipalities for each party
(Appendix Table C.1), as well as over time within municipalities.10
Thus, the number of advantaged positions that parties give appears to
be a real choice.
4. The gatekeeper’s dilemma
In what follows, we introduce a stylized model to analyze parties’
optimal allocation of advantaged positions. For ease of presentation,
we will first focus on the candidates’ campaign effort choice, fixing
an allocation of advantaged positions. We will then define the party’s
objective function and characterize the equilibrium allocation strategy.
4 In the 2019 elections, which our empirical analysis focuses on, 46 percent
of voters cast at least one personal vote.
5 The principle of highest average methods, like modified Sainte-Laguë, is
to distribute seats in consecutive rounds to the party that ‘‘most deserves’’ a
seat. This is achieved by using a series of divisors, which depend on the seats
granted to the party in prior rounds. Modified Sainte-Laguë uses the divisor
series ‘‘1.4, 3, 5, 7, ...’’. The D’Hondt method, which was used in Norwegian
local elections until 1999, uses the divisor series ‘‘1, 2, 3, 4, ...’’ (Fiva and
Folke, 2016).
6 Candidates with a head start are listed at the top of the ballot paper in
boldface. Appendix Figure C.1 provides an example.
7 In 2019, only 2% of non-advantaged candidates received personal votes
amounting to 25% of the total number of votes received by the party, which
is the minimum to overtake a candidate with a head start (see Appendix Figure
C.2). Only 0.2% of non-advantaged candidates beat a candidates with a head
start in 2019.
8 In councils with fewer than 23 members, parties can give an advantage
to a maximum of 4 candidates. For councils with 23 to 53 members, the
maximum is 6, and for councils with more than 53 members, 10 is the
limit (Fiva and Røhr, 2018). In our sample, 8 percent of party lists are at
the maximum allowed.
9 Within our baseline estimation sample, 80% of advantaged candidates
secure election, compared to 13% of those without an advantage.
10 For municipalities that were not involved in any mergers between 2015
and 2019, we find a correlation between the number of advantaged candidates
at the list-level of 0.49.
4.1. The candidates’ effort choice
Consider the game between 𝑛candidates belonging to the same
party, that only care about their own individual success (i.e., their
probability of winning a seat). Each candidate’s strategic choice is
the amount of costly campaign effort to exert 𝑒𝑖∈[0, 1]. Formally,
each candidate 𝑖’s utility is 𝑈𝑖= I𝑖𝑅−
𝑒2
𝑖
2 , where I𝑖takes value 1 if
candidate 𝑖obtains a seat and 0 otherwise.11 The individual candidates’
campaign effort influences the party’s overall electoral performance.
We model this electoral process in a reduced-form. The number of votes
received by the party (𝑉) is a function of the 𝑛candidates’ effort choices
(∑𝑛
𝑖=1 𝑒𝑖), the party’s ex-ante electoral strength (𝑆),12 and a random
shock (𝛿∼𝑈[−1
2𝜙, 1
2𝜙]):
𝑉=
𝑛
∑
𝑖=1
𝑒𝑖+ 𝑆+ 𝛿.
(2)
The allocation of seats to the party is proportional to its vote-share.
Specifically, for each 𝑥, there is a threshold 𝑥⋅𝐾that the votes obtained
by the party must surpass to win 𝑥seats. Thus, the party obtains 1 seat
if 𝑉∈[𝐾, 2𝐾), 2 seats if 𝑉∈[2𝐾, 3𝐾) etc.
The allocation of the seats within the party is a function of two
elements: each candidate’s effort choice, and the allocation of advan-
taged positions by the party leadership. Each seat that the party wins
is allocated to the set of advantaged candidates first. Only after all
the advantaged candidates have obtained a seat, the residual seats are
allocated to the non-advantaged candidates. Suppose, for example, that
the party assigns an advantaged position to 3 candidates, and wins
a total of 𝜎> 3 seats. Then, 3 seats are allocated to the advantaged
candidates and 𝜎−3 to the non-advantaged ones. Suppose instead that
the party assigns an advantaged position to 3 candidates, and wins a
total of 𝜎≤3 seats. Then, all the seats are allocated to the advantaged
group.
Within each group (advantaged and non-advantaged), each candi-
date’s probability of obtaining a seat is increasing in their effort choice,
and decreasing in the effort choice of the other candidates in the same
group. Formally, seats are allocated as a result of a (sequential) Tullock
contest, as in Crutzen et al. (2020). For example, suppose that the party
wins a single seat, and allocates an advantaged position to 𝑛𝑎> 1
candidates.13 Then, for each advantaged candidate 𝑖𝑎, the probability
of obtaining a seat is:
𝑄𝑖𝑎(1) =
𝑒𝑖𝑎
∑
𝑖𝑎𝑒𝑖𝑎
.
(3)
Suppose instead that the party wins a total of two seats and allocates
an advantaged position to 𝑛𝑎> 2 candidates. Then each advantaged
candidate’s probability of obtaining the first seat is as above (𝑄𝑖𝑎(1)).
The candidate that obtains this first seat is then excluded from the
contest for the second. Each advantaged candidate 𝑖𝑎’s probability of
obtaining a seat is therefore
𝑄𝑖𝑎(2) =
𝑒𝑖𝑎
∑
𝑖𝑎𝑒𝑖𝑎
+ (1 −
𝑒𝑖𝑎
∑
𝑖𝑎𝑒𝑖𝑎
)
𝑒𝑖𝑎
∑
𝑖𝑎≠𝑤1 𝑒𝑖𝑎
,
(4)
where 𝑤1 denotes the candidate that won the first seat. If the party wins
11 We impose 𝑅< 1 to ensure interior solutions.
12 As a function, for example, of the voters’ ideological leaning or the value
of the party brand.
13 Abusing notation, 𝑛𝑎will denote both the set of advantaged candidates
and the cardinality of this set.


=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
Journal of Public Economics 234 (2024) 105133
5
J.H. Fiva et al.
more seats than the number of advantaged candidates, the allocation
within the non-advantaged group follows an analogous process.14
4.2. Analysis
We use this model to formally characterize the candidates’ equilib-
rium effort choices under various allocations of advantaged positions.
The specific calculations, which will be crucial in determining which
allocation maximizes total effort, are relegated to Appendix A. How-
ever, it is important to highlight an intuitive property of the candidates’
equilibrium choices here.
Denote 𝑁the minimum number of seats the party is guaranteed to
obtain, i.e., the number of seats the party expects to win thanks to its
ex-ante electoral strength (even if all candidates exert 0 effort, and the
shock 𝛿takes its smallest value). 𝑛𝑎∈[0, 𝑛] indicates the number of
advantaged candidates in the list. Then, we have:
Remark 1.
Suppose that candidates with an advantaged status are
guaranteed a seat (i.e., 𝑁≥𝑛𝑎> 0). Then, these candidates exert no
effort in equilibrium.
In the model, candidates care solely about their individual success.
As such, even if the party’s collective performance depends on the mem-
bers’ individual contributions, a candidate will not find it worthwhile
to invest in costly effort if they are always guaranteed a seat. This
situation occurs when the party assigns fewer advantaged positions
than the minimum number of seats it anticipates winning, i.e., when
𝑁≥𝑛𝑎> 0. We refer to these cases as lists with bottom only
competition, indicating that only candidates without an advantage
(listed at the bottom) are subject to internal competition for seats.
In contrast, if the party assigns 𝑛𝑎> 𝑁, advantaged status does
not ensure a seat, and even the advantaged candidates are subject
to intraparty competition. We will refer to lists in which 𝑛𝑎> 𝑁
as lists with top competition to signify that even the advantaged
candidates (listed at the top in bold) must compete with their fellow
party members to secure a seat.15
Remark 1 highlights two important aspects of the strategic problem
faced by the party leadership. First, the leadership faces a moral hazard
problem vis-à-vis the candidates: the overall success of the party hinges
on the individual candidates’ effort choices (as detailed below), yet
each candidate has an incentive to exert effort only to the extent
necessary to secure a seat. Secondly, through the decision to allocate
advantaged status to some of the candidates, the party leadership holds
the power to fundamentally reshape the structure and intensity of com-
petition within the list, thereby influencing the candidates’ incentives
for effort.
14 Formally, denote as 𝜒the number of seats won by the party and allocated
to the set of advantaged candidates (notice that 𝜒= 𝑚𝑖𝑛∈{𝜎, 𝑛𝑎}). The
probability that each of the advantaged candidates wins a seat is:
𝑄𝑖𝑎(𝜒) = 𝑞1 +
𝑚𝑎
∑
𝑗=2
𝑞𝑗(
𝑗∏
𝑠=1
(1 −𝑞𝑠)),
where
𝑞𝑗=
𝑒𝑖𝑎
𝑒𝑖𝑎+ ∑
𝑘≠𝑖𝑎𝑒𝑘
,
for all 𝑖𝑎, 𝑘∈𝑛𝑎∖{𝑤𝑗−1}. 𝑤𝑗−1 denotes the set of advantaged candidates that
won the first 𝑗−1 seats. In an analogous way, we can define 𝜉= 𝑚𝑎𝑥∈
{0, 𝜎−𝜒}, and the probability of winning a seat for a candidate that does not
receive an advantage as 𝑄𝑖𝑛𝑎(𝜉).
15 In top-competition lists both advantaged and non-advantaged candidates
have incentives to exert effort, as long as the number of advantages is not
larger than the maximum number of seats the party may ever hope to win.
If that instead is the case, non-advantaged candidates are hopeless and only
advantaged ones exert positive effort in equilibrium.
4.3. Empirical evidence on candidates’ effort choice
Before moving to analyze the party’s optimal allocation, we turn to
the data. We aim to verify that, in our setting, candidates respond to
incentives as posited in our model. In particular, we seek to validate
Remark 1, i.e., the claim that when candidates are insulated from
internal competition (because their advantaged status guarantees them
a seat), they will have lower incentives to exert costly campaign effort,
even if this means damaging the party’s collective performance.
We consider the candidates running for office in the 2019 local
election (54,244 candidates) (Fiva et al., 2021). We exclude the 1,551
candidates running in Oslo and Bergen, since these two municipali-
ties have chosen a parliamentary system. We also exclude candidates
running for non-standard lists (i.e. joint lists of the main parties,
party-independent lists, and minor party lists) (10,584 candidates),
candidates running for office in municipalities involved in mergers
(11,601 candidates), and candidates that have any missing data from
the administrative registers (2,940 candidates). This leaves us with a
sample of 29,312 candidates running at 1,626 lists. In order to classify
party lists as adopting either bottom or top competition, we consider
the minimum number of seats the list won in the last four elections,
corresponding to the parameter 𝑁in the model. Then, lists with bottom
only competition are lists in which the number of advantages is weakly
lower than 𝑁, while lists with top competition are lists in which the
number of advantages is higher than 𝑁.
We do not have a direct measure of campaign effort. Instead, we
rely on a proxy: candidates’ within-list personal vote-shares. In the
Appendix, we present the results using an alternative proxy: candidates’
within-list share of media hits in the six weeks leading up to election
day.16 Of course, a candidate’s vote-share (or share of media hits) is
not solely a function of their effort choice. The candidates’ personal
characteristics as well as features of the party will also have an impact,
above and beyond campaigning effort. As such, we cannot simply
compare candidates with and without an advantaged status, since this
is likely to be correlated with a host of relevant individual character-
istics. Similarly, we cannot simply compare candidates from different
parties, some where the advantage guarantees a seat (bottom only
competition) and others where it does not (top competition). Parties
strategically choose their list type, therefore the choice of bottom versus
top competition is likely to be endogenous to features of the party that
also impact our outcomes of interest. It is also possible that parties
adopting different list structures systematically select different types of
candidates.
To circumvent these issues, we estimate the following regression
model:
𝑌𝑖𝑝𝑚= 𝛼𝑇𝑜𝑝𝑝𝑚+ 𝛽𝐴𝑖𝑝𝑚+ 𝛿𝑇𝑜𝑝𝑝𝑚⋅𝐴𝑖𝑝𝑚+ 𝜂𝑝+ 𝝀′𝐗𝐢𝐩𝐦+ 𝑢𝑖𝑝𝑚.
(5)
For ease of illustration, we estimate the model separately for lists
that have two, three, four, or five to six advantaged candidates.17 Here
𝑌𝑖𝑝𝑚denotes the share of personal votes that candidate 𝑖gets in party
list 𝑝in municipality 𝑚. 𝑇𝑜𝑝𝑝𝑚denotes lists with top competition (𝑛𝑎>
𝑁), and captures the baseline effect of different party (or candidate)
characteristics associated with this list structure. 𝐴𝑖𝑝𝑚is a dummy equal
to one if 𝑖holds an advantaged position, and captures the baseline
effect of different individual characteristics associated with advantaged
status. The parameter of interest, 𝛿, captures the interaction between
these two variables, i.e., the difference between the effect of being in
a top versus bottom competition list for advantaged candidates, net
16 The data come from the media archive Atekst, which has comprehensive
coverage of news stories appearing in Norwegian newspapers on the web and
in print, as well as stories in radio and TV. This database has previously
been used by Cox et al. (2021) to construct measures of campaign effort for
candidates’ participating in the 2017 national election.
17 We do not study cases with more than 6 advantaged as they are rare.


=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
Journal of Public Economics 234 (2024) 105133
6
J.H. Fiva et al.
Fig. 1. Vote shares by rank and nature of competition.
Note: This figure displays candidates’ personal vote share (within party list) by pre-election ballot rank and nature of competition. We split the sample by the number of advantaged
candidates (given in the title of each sub-panel). We pool cases where the advantage is given to 5-6 candidates because of few observations.
of the difference for non-advantaged ones. This interaction approach
allows us to control for differences in individual level characteristics
between candidates in different list types, as well as the differences
between advantaged and non-advantaged candidates in the same list.
Furthermore, the regression controls for the choices that the party
makes, that is, the list type, the candidates’ rank and their advantage
status. We expect top competition to motivate advantaged candidates
at the top of the list to put in more effort (𝛿> 0).
In Eq. (5), we also include party fixed-effects 𝜂𝑝(thus leveraging
variation within party across municipalities), as well as a battery of
individual-level covariates 𝐗𝐢𝐩𝐦.18 Adding these additional candidate
characteristics is potentially relevant since it is possible that there is
selection specifically into safe spots. That is, even when accounting
for average differences across lists, parties that choose bottom only
competition (i.e., 𝑛𝑎≤𝑁) may systematically select different advan-
taged candidates than parties adopting top-competition lists, where
advantaged positions are not secure (i.e., 𝑛𝑎> 𝑁).
We start by providing a graphical illustration of the raw data. In
Fig. 1 we plot candidates’ vote shares by pre-election ballot rank and
list type (top or bottom only competition).19 The results are striking
and systematic. When candidates are facing intra-party competition at
the top of the list, they tend to receive more personal votes.20 For
18 For the time-varying individual characteristics, we use data from 2018,
the year before the election. Appendix Table C.2 provides descriptive statistics
for the main variables in our empirical analysis.
19 We pool candidates ranked lower than 10 in a ‘‘10+’’ category. The
average list length is 18.6, 19.7, 22.3, and 31.4 for lists that give an advantage
to 2, 3, 4, and 5–6 candidates.
20 The only exception to the result is candidates that are ranked first,
for whom personal vote shares are more similar under the two allocation
structures for the cases when 5-6 advantaged positions are given (typically
example, looking at lists with two advantaged candidates, a first-ranked
candidate gets about nine percentage points higher personal vote share
when the advantage does not insulate him or her from internal compe-
tition. We find a corresponding effect of about four percentage points
for the second-ranked candidates. For lower-ranked candidates, where
none are insulated from competition, there are no clear discernible
differences between the two types of allocation structures.
In Table 1 we provide the corresponding regression results. In
line with the graphical evidence, we estimate 𝛿to be 7.6 percentage
points for lists that give an advantage to two candidates. This estimate
corresponds to the average difference between the two lines for rank 1
and 2 in Fig. 1 (first difference) and the two lines for ranks lower than
2 (second difference), after netting out individual-level characteristics
and national party fixed effects. For lists with an advantage given
to 3, 4, and 5–6 candidates, we find similar results.21 The somewhat
smaller estimated 𝛿of 3.6 −5.0 percentage points partly reflect that
larger parties). Crucially, parties typically place the mayoral candidate in
the top-ranked position. Thus, especially in the larger parties, top-ranked
candidates have more incentives to campaign in order to increase their party’s
overall performance, and thus, the chances of winning the mayoral position,
even if their own seat in the council is safe (Cox et al., 2021).
21 In Appendix Table C.3, we investigate the possibility that there is sys-
tematic selection into safe spots. We find that candidates that have prior
experience as councillors or mayors are more likely to obtain an advantage in a
bottom only competition list. However, these imbalances are unlikely to drive
our results. Candidates with previous political experiences likely attract more
personal votes, regardless of their effort choice. If anything, this would lead
to a downward bias in our main estimates absent controls. This may explain
why, in fact, our results are even stronger where we include individual-level
controls (compare Table 1 with controls, and the top-left panel of Appendix
Table C.3 without controls).


=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
Journal of Public Economics 234 (2024) 105133
7
J.H. Fiva et al.
Table 1
Candidates insulated from intraparty competition receive fewer personal votes.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Advantage 2
Advantage 3
Advantage 4
Advantage 5-6
Top competition
0.002
0.004∗
0.002
−0.003
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
Advantage
0.127∗∗∗
0.104∗∗∗
0.074∗∗∗
0.060∗∗∗
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.003)
Top competition X Advantage
0.076∗∗∗
0.037∗∗∗
0.050∗∗∗
0.036∗∗∗
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.007)
Mean of outcome var.
0.055
0.053
0.046
0.033
R-squared
0.58
0.55
0.53
0.50
Observations
10 606
4458
4071
3025
Notes: The outcome variable is the candidates’ personal vote share (within party list). The baseline sample
is all the candidates running for one of the seven main parties in the 2019 local election. We drop all
lists where we fail to match any candidates with administrative data from Statistics Norway. We split the
sample by the number of advantaged candidates (given in the title of each column). We pool cases where
the advantage is given to 5-6 candidates because of few observations. We control for various candidate
characteristics and national party fixed effects (see Eq. (5)). Appendix Table C.4 provides the full regression
results. Standard errors are clustered at the municipal level and reported in parentheses. * denotes 10%
statistical significance, ** 5% and *** 1%.
lists with more advantaged candidates tend to be longer (as reflected
in the mean of the outcome variable). In all sub-samples, the estimated
𝛿is statistically significant.22 We interpret these results as evidence that
the candidates’ campaigning effort responds to the incentives induced
by the party leadership’s advantage allocation strategy in the expected
way.23
4.4. The party’s optimal choice
Under the reassurance that the moral hazard problem we hypothe-
size is empirically relevant in our setting, we now proceed to analyze
the optimal number of advantaged positions for the party leadership to
allocate.
Building on the literature emphasizing that parties place a premium
on the ability to influence political nomination processes (Cohen et al.,
2008; McCarty and Schickler, 2018), we assume that the party lead-
ership cares about seats (and, thus, maximizing campaign effort), but
also values the possibility to protect some of its candidates. Recall that
𝑛𝑎indicates the number of advantaged positions allocated by the party,
and 𝑁is the minimum number of seats the party expects to win. Denote
𝜎the total number of seats won by the party. Then, we have that the
leadership’s utility 𝑈𝑙is:
𝑈𝑙=
{
𝑊𝜎+ 𝐵,
if 0 < 𝑛𝑎≤𝑁
𝑊𝜎,
otherwise
(6)
Thus, 𝑊is the value of each additional seat. Recall that when
𝑛𝑎≤𝑁, the advantaged candidates are always guaranteed a seat. As
22 One potential concern is that the supply of high-quality candidates may
confound our results, affecting both the number of advantages allocated by the
party and the distribution of votes within the list. To address this concern, we
repeat our analysis splitting the sample using municipal population as a proxy
for these supply-side factors: municipalities with population above (below)
10,000 can be considered as environments with high (low) supply of good
candidates. Reassuringly, we show that the results are very similar in both
subsamples (Appendix Tables C.5 and C.6).
23 Appendix Table C.7 provides the regression results for our alternative
proxy for effort, the share of media hits. We find that top candidates facing
intra-party competition receive about 3 percentage points more media hits in
the six weeks preceding the elections. Because media hits are more unequally
distributed across candidates than personal votes, as some candidates get lot
of hits and most none, the estimated 𝛿are less precise. However, in all four
sub-samples, the estimated effects are statistically distinguishable from zero at
least at the ten percent level.
such, 𝐵captures in a reduced-form the payoff premium that the lead-
ership obtains from insulating specific candidates from competition.24
Substantively, insulating some candidates from competition may be
valuable for the party leadership in and of itself (because the leadership
wants to ensure its preferred candidates get to office), or because this
represents a prize or reward the leadership allocates within the context
of a larger dynamic intra-party bargaining process. Adopting a reduced-
form approach, we black-box the question of why parties want to
protect some candidates, and simply focus on the potential trade-off
between selection (i.e., protecting some candidates) and effort.
Before proceeding to the analysis, it is important to emphasize that
we do not explicitly consider candidates with different characteristics
in the model. This is not to say that we assume all candidates are the
same: individual heterogeneity is precisely why the party leadership
may value managing the selection. Instead, here we take a stylized
approach, which allows us to abstract from the issue of which types
parties prefer, and focus on the tradeoff between incentivizing effort
and gatekeeping selection.25
Hereafter, we will assume that 𝑛= 4 and 𝑁= 1, i.e., the party
list includes 4 candidates and the party is always guaranteed at least 1
seat.26
Analysis. First, it is important to establish what is the allocation
strategy that maximizes campaign effort in our setting:
Lemma 1. Total campaign effort (and thus expected number of seats) is
maximized when the party allocates zero advantaged positions (𝑛𝑎= 0).
A fully open list, meaning a list where no candidate enjoys a special
advantage, maximizes total effort and therefore the party’s collective
performance. Intra-party competition is heightened under an open
list, which ensures that all candidates can have an (equal) chance of
24 Our key results from Proposition 1 are unchanged if we allow the party
to also obtain a premium from excluding some candidates from competition
(i.e., from choosing 𝑛𝑎≥𝑁).
25 An important caveat is that this approach relies on the assumption that
the marginal cost of effort is not a function of candidates’ characteristics.
26 These assumptions ensure the analysis is tractable, while also guarantee-
ing that all allocation strategies (open list, bottom only competition, and top
competition) are available to the party leadership.


=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
Journal of Public Economics 234 (2024) 105133
8
J.H. Fiva et al.
winning a seat27 and are therefore incentivized to exert costly campaign
effort.28
This illuminates the gatekeeper’s dilemma. If the party leadership
was interested solely in maximizing the candidates’ campaign effort
(which then translates into seats), it should never allocate any advan-
taged position, so as to intensify internal competition. However, the
party also values selection, and obtains a benefit from using advantaged
positions so as to protect its preferred candidate(s).
Here, we are interested in understanding under which conditions
the party leadership chooses to protect some candidates, at the ex-
penses of its collective electoral success (i.e., number of seats). Given
our setup, it is straightforward to see that we can always find a 𝐵
large enough that the party finds it optimal to strategically allocate
advantaged positions to protect some of its candidates, rather than
maximizing incentives for effort. Less straightforwardly, our analysis
shows that the value of 𝐵that induces a party to adopt this strategy is
a function of its ex-ante electoral strength (𝑆): the stronger the party,
the lower this threshold. This yields the following result:
Proposition 1.
The likelihood (in the sense of set inclusion) that the
party leadership allocates advantaged positions to insulate some candidates
from competition (i.e., chooses bottom only competition) is increasing in the
party’s ex-ante electoral strength 𝑆.
Notice that Lemma 1 implies that, in equilibrium, the party will
either assign no advantaged positions at all, in order to maximize effort,
or choose bottom only competition (0 < 𝑛𝑎≤𝑁), in order to select its
preferred candidates.29 Under 0 < 𝑛𝑎≤𝑁, the advantaged candidates
are always guaranteed a seat, therefore only the non-advantaged ones
will ever have incentives to exert effort. Such candidates are competing
for the few seats that the party may win, and that would remain open
after all advantaged candidates have secured a position. As the party’s
ex-ante electoral strength increases (everything else being equal), the
number of seats it expects to win is higher. Fixing the number of
advantaged candidates, this implies that there is a higher number of
positions to allocate to the non-advantaged group. In principle, this
could either increase or decrease the equilibrium effort decision of
the non-advantaged candidates. A higher number of available prizes
reduces the stakes of winning the internal contest, which may diminish
the motivation to exert effort. On the other hand, this also implies
that each candidate may hope to win a seat by achieving a sufficiently
high rank in the internal competition, without the need to be the top
contender. This possibility, in turn, enhances the incentives to invest
effort. Our analysis shows that the second effect dominates. Thus, the
non-advantaged candidates’ campaign effort increases with the party’s
ex-ante electoral strength 𝑆. A similar effect emerges under open-list
(𝑛𝑎= 0), but there the marginal impact of increasing party strength is
27 Notice that the party can achieve this either by assigning no advantages,
or by assigning advantages to all the members of the list. However, in the
Norwegian context there is an exogenous upper bound to the number of
advantages parties can allocate, therefore it is typically unfeasible to assign
advantaged statuses to all candidates on the list. We maintain this assumption
in the model, although our results from Proposition 1 would remain robust
upon relaxing this restriction.
28 All candidates in the list can have incentives to exert effort even if some
advantages are assigned, as long as 𝑛𝑎> 𝑁. Under this allocation, competition
is segmented between top and bottom of the list, but even advantaged
candidates have to compete with each other to obtain a seat. However, our
analysis reveals that this allocation strategy is inefficient for the party, as both
groups of candidates have lower incentives to exert effort than under a fully
open list.
29 If we allow the party to also obtain a premium from excluding some
candidates from competition (as in Footnote 24), this list structure will
sometimes be chosen in equilibrium, but our predictions from Proposition 1
remain unchanged.
reduced by the fact that internal competition is more intense. In other
words, the difference in equilibrium effort under the two allocation
structures is decreasing in 𝑆. Thus, if 𝑆is too low, protecting some
candidates comes at a high cost for the party. In contrast, when 𝑆is
high, parties can secure seats for their preferred candidates without sac-
rificing collective performance. Therefore, electorally stronger parties
experience a weaker trade-off, and can get the best of both worlds.
4.5. Robustness and extensions
Before proceeding with our empirical analysis, it is important to
discuss whether our theoretical results are robust to altering the model
in some intuitive ways. One assumption adopted in the model is that
candidates only care about being elected, and therefore are only moti-
vated to exert effort insofar as it is necessary to obtain seat. However,
it is plausible that individual candidates may harbor additional motives
for investing in the campaign. For example, they might seek visibility
to bolster their chances in future elections or have a desire to maximize
personal votes to enhance their standing within the party.
In Appendix B, we analyze a version of the model with this feature.
We show that, while the individual candidates’ effort choices may differ
from the baseline model, our main prediction of interest (Proposition 1)
remains robust. The intuition is as follows. Under specific conditions,
candidates’ eagerness to gain exposure might be so pronounced that
all are willing to invest the maximum effort, regardless of their ad-
vantaged status or their prospects of being elected. In such cases, any
allocation strategy from the party leadership yields an identical total
effort from the candidate list. However, when this is not the case,
and the candidates are incentivized to exert more effort when it is
instrumental in winning a seat, the party experiences the exact same
trade-off we described in the baseline model. The party leadership
may want to assign advantages to protect its preferred candidates, but
total effort is higher under open list. However, the difference between
effort under open-list and effort in bottom-competition lists decreases
as 𝑆increases, mirroring the logic in the baseline model. Thus, ex-
ante more popular parties face a weaker trade-off, and are better
positioned to use advantages strategically. Averaging across all cases,
our prediction remains unchanged: the likelihood that, in equilibrium,
the party leadership chooses to use advantaged status to secure a seat
for its preferred candidates increases in the party’s ex-ante electoral
strength.
Looking instead at the party’s motives, in the baseline model we
assume that the parties obtain the benefit 𝐵when assigning advantages
in a way that completely insulates certain candidates from competi-
tion. However, it is possible that in addition to the strategic value
of securing a seat for these candidates, parties may obtain a benefit
from assigning advantages more generally. For example, parties may
want to use advantages as a reward for candidates’ past behavior, or
within the context of a broader bargaining process with the members.
In Appendix B, we analyze an extension of the baseline model where,
in addition to the value of isolating their preferred candidates from
internal competition, parties obtain a benefit that is a function (either
decreasing or increasing) of the number of advantaged positions they
allocate. Our prediction from Proposition 1 remains robust. Depending
on the parameter values, parties may sometimes want to adopt an open-
list, while other times prefer to assign advantages to one or multiple
members of the list. However, the likelihood that they choose an allo-
cation strategy that fully insulates some candidates from competition
is increasing in their ex-ante popularity with the electorate.
4.6. Empirical evidence on optimal choice and ex-ante electoral strength
We now return to the data to investigate the validity of the pre-
dictions from Proposition 1 in our setting. We use the party’s aver-
age historic performance as a proxy for its ex-ante electoral strength
(𝑆) (Fiva et al., 2023). More precisely, focusing on parties’ strategic


=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
Journal of Public Economics 234 (2024) 105133
9
J.H. Fiva et al.
Table 2
Relationship between bottom only competition (0 < 𝑛𝑎≤𝑁) and electoral strength measured by the local party historic vote
share.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
All
All
All
All
𝐴< 𝐴_𝑚𝑎𝑥
0 < 𝑁
𝑁< 𝐴_𝑚𝑎𝑥
Voteshare (historic average)
1.993∗∗∗
1.733∗∗∗
1.396∗∗∗
1.863∗∗∗
1.785∗∗∗
1.721∗∗∗
3.068∗∗∗
(0.080)
(0.110)
(0.141)
(0.133)
(0.144)
(0.133)
(0.292)
Number of incumbents
0.022∗∗∗
0.016∗∗∗
0.024∗∗∗
0.034∗∗∗
0.021∗∗∗
0.021∗
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.008)
(0.006)
(0.012)
Mean of outcome variable
0.607
0.607
0.607
0.607
0.615
0.643
0.492
R-squared
0.25
0.26
0.30
0.31
0.29
0.26
0.20
Observations
1387
1387
1387
1387
1256
1309
1030
Party FE
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
Municipality FE
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Notes: We estimate a linear probability model (OLS). Standard errors are clustered at the municipal level and reported in
parentheses. * denotes 10% statistical significance, ** 5% and *** 1%.
Fig. 2. The likelihood that a party chooses bottom only competition (0 < 𝑛𝑎≤𝑁)
increases with electoral strength measured by the local party historic vote share.
Note: This binned scatterplot shows the percent of local party lists choosing 0 < 𝑛𝑎≤𝑁
(denoted on the 𝑦axis as ‘bottom competition’) in the 2019 election as a function of
the local party historic vote share.
behavior in the 2019 elections as dependent variable, we measure ex-
ante strength using the average of each party’s vote share in all prior
local elections since 2003. Fig. 2 displays the raw data, while Table 2
reports the regression result.30 We find that, in line with our theoretical
results, the likelihood that a party chooses to protect some candidates
from competition by assigning them an advantaged status increases
with the party’s ex-ante electoral strength. Specifically, a 10%-point
increase in the party’s prior vote share is associated with about a 20%-
point increase in the likelihood of the party adopting bottom only
competition, on average.
This relationship is robust to including several controls. In column
(2), we control for the number of re-running incumbents in the party.
This addresses the possibility that due to a seniority norm, parties need
to allocate advantaged positions to their re-running incumbents who
30 In the Appendix, we repeat the analysis using the local party vote share in
the preceding national elections as an alternative proxy (see Appendix Table
C.8 and Appendix Figure C.3).
demand them, rather than thinking about this choice strategically. Ex-
ante stronger parties are likely to have more re-running incumbents,
therefore this may confound our results. This also controls for the pos-
sibility that, since bold characters tend to attract the voters’ attention,
parties may decide to have their more popular politicians (e.g., the
ones who previously won election) in advantaged position to exploit
this nudge in the electoral booth. While our coefficient of interest
slightly decreases in size the substantial effect remains comparable and
the coefficient remains highly statistically significant. In column (3),
we include party fixed effect, and leverage variations within parties
across municipalities. This addresses the potential concern that specific
parties, who are stronger across municipalities and for perhaps idiosyn-
cratic reasons tend to adopt bottom-competition lists, would drive the
results. Our findings indicate this is not a significant concern in our
setting. Again, our coefficient of interest remains highly significant and
large. In column (4), we include municipalities fixed effect, leveraging
variation within municipalities across parties. Because we only look at
the 2019 elections, these fixed effect perfectly control for features such
as the size of the council, the intensity of competition across parties,
differences in the pool of potential candidates, etc. In Column (5),
we drop from the sample those local parties that chose the maximum
possible number of advantages, since this constrained optimum may
not align with their choice absent the upper bound. In column (6) and
(7), respectively, we drop those local parties for whom 𝑁is equal to
zero, and 𝑁is larger than the maximum number of advantages a party
can assign in the municipality, since the choice for these parties is
mechanical. In all of these specifications, our results remain robust and
strongly in line with our theoretical predictions.
Thus, while our design does not allow us to make causal claims on
the effect of parties’ popularity on their strategic choice when it comes
to allocating advantages positions, the correlation is remarkably robust
and strongly in line with our theoretical prediction.
Furthermore, we provide some suggestive evidence that the specific
mechanism underlying our theoretical prediction is also at play in
our empirical results. In our model, political parties face a trade-off
between maximizing effort (by adopting an open list) and protecting
their preferred candidates (by adopting bottom-competition lists). This
tradeoff emerges for two reasons: first, advantaged candidates in a
bottom-competition list have no reason to exert costly effort; second,
assigning the certainty of a seat to the advantaged candidates depresses
incentives for effort for the non-advantaged candidates as well, since
there are less prizes available for them to win. Our prediction in
Proposition 1 emerges because this second effect is dampened for ex-
ante more popular parties. Thus, if our hypothesized mechanism is
correct, we should observe a higher effort choice from non-advantaged
candidates in bottom only competition lists as the party’s ex-ante
strength increases.
Indeed, this is exactly what the results in Table 3 suggest. Limiting
the sample to bottom only competition lists, we find that the share of
personal votes obtained by the non-advantaged candidates in the list


=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
Journal of Public Economics 234 (2024) 105133
10
J.H. Fiva et al.
Table 3
The share of personal votes to non-advantaged candidates in bottom only competition lists increase with
the party’s electoral strength (𝑆).
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Voteshare (historic average)
0.278∗∗∗
0.239∗∗∗
0.314∗∗∗
0.231∗∗∗
0.125∗∗∗
(0.035)
(0.032)
(0.033)
(0.039)
(0.048)
Length of list
0.005∗∗∗
0.005∗∗∗
0.005∗∗∗
0.008∗∗∗
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
List with mayor
−0.056∗∗∗
−0.073∗∗∗
−0.063∗∗∗
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.010)
Mean of outcome variable
0.624
0.624
0.624
0.624
0.624
R-squared
0.39
0.45
0.47
0.51
0.44
Observations
842
842
842
842
842
Advantage (count) FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Party FE
No
No
No
Yes
No
Municipality FE
No
No
No
No
Yes
Notes: We limit the sample to bottom only competition, and regress the share of personal votes to non-
advantaged candidates on the party’s ex-ante electoral strength, 𝑆. The unit of analysis is a list in a
municipality. * denotes 10% statistical significance, ** 5% and *** 1%.
(over the advantaged ones) increases in the party’s ex-ante electoral
strength. This holds even after controlling for the length of the list,
whether a previous mayor is in the list, the number of advantages
allocated by the party, and party/municipality fixed effects. The re-
lationship is also robust to using the local party’s vote-share in the
previous national election as alternative proxy for electoral strength
(Appendix Table C.9).
5. Electorally strong parties, the gatekeeper’s dilemma and post-
electoral outcomes
In our earlier sections we established, theoretically and empirically,
that ex-ante more popular parties are more likely to insulate their pre-
ferred candidates from competition. The mechanism is that, although
all parties face a trade-off between effort and selection, this trade-off is
less pronounced for electorally stronger parties. In essence, these par-
ties appear to enjoy a strategic advantage, as they can safeguard their
preferred candidates without significantly compromising incentives for
the other members of their list to exert costly campaign effort.
In this section, we explore the ramifications of this strategic ad-
vantage, specifically investigating how a party’s capacity to secure
seats for their preferred candidates shapes post-electoral outcomes.
In an ideal experiment, we would randomly allocate the number of
advantaged candidates in each party and compare post-election out-
comes. Of course, this is impossible. Furthermore, our earlier results
suggest that the decision to allocate advantaged statuses to shield
specific candidates from competition is endogenous to the party’s ini-
tial strength. Consequently, merely comparing outcomes across parties
making different allocation choices offers no prospect of isolating the
causal impact from potential confounders.
To address this challenge, we adopt a two-step approach, focusing
on identifying the type of candidates that parties tend to protect, and
the consequences of such candidates being elected for post-electoral
outcomes. First, we compare the individual traits that have a positive
correlation with a candidate’s personal vote-share and those that are
positively associated with obtaining an advantaged status from the
party. When certain characteristics are linked to an advantaged sta-
tus but do not necessarily predict a higher vote-share, we interpret
this disparity as indicative of features that parties value indepen-
dently of voter preferences. Second, we therefore explore how the
election of candidates possessing these valued characteristics impacts
the party’s post-electoral bargaining outcomes. This provides an indica-
tion of whether a strategic advantage in navigating the selection-control
tradeoff generates further advantages for the party in other domains.
5.1. Identifying valuable characteristics
Our goal in this section is to identify candidate characteristics
that parties value above and beyond their electoral appeal. For this
purpose, we compare the results of two regressions. First, we estimate a
linear probability model where we regress advantage status on a set of
candidate-level characteristics and local party fixed effects. The results
of this regression, reported in Appendix Table C.10, identify candidate
characteristics that predict obtaining an advantaged position.31
Next, we study what candidate characteristics are positively as-
sociated with higher personal voteshare. We regress the candidates’
personal votes on their characteristics, while controlling for the advan-
tage status, pre-election rank fixed effects and local party fixed effects.
The results are reported in Appendix Table C.13.32
By comparing the results of the two analyses, we see that most
of the covariates that are positively associated with probability of
obtaining an advantage are also positive predictors of personal vote-
shares, and vice-versa. Furthermore, the substantive magnitude of the
effects (standardized by the mean of the outcome variable) are similar
in both regression. However, there is some disagreement. Notably,
women are more likely to secure an advantaged position in the list, yet
they tend to receive fewer personal votes than men. Furthermore, while
both voters and parties seem to favor previous incumbents, the effect
of being an incumbent on the likelihood of securing an advantaged
position is significantly larger than the effect on vote share.
With this information at hand, we can therefore investigate how
the ability to use gatekeeping power to select specific types of candi-
dates, i.e., women and incumbents, influences parties’ success in the
post-electoral bargaining process.
5.2. Women, incumbents and post-electoral bargaining
We investigate the hypothesis that women and incumbents are
valuable for political parties because electing such candidates secures
a premium in the post-election bargaining process. In our setting, such
bargaining advantage could result in the party obtaining a dispropor-
tionate share of the seats in the municipal board. The significance of
these positions is substantial. As mentioned earlier, municipalities serve
as crucial policy-making entities, overseeing vital social services such
31 In Appendix C, we investigate potential heterogeneity in these results.
Interestingly, the patterns do not seem to vary much across ideological
blocs (Appendix Table C.11) or the nature of the inter-party competition as
measured by how intensely they are competing for the mayoral seat (Appendix
Table C.12).
32 This analysis is related to our campaigning analysis reported in Table 1,
but fundamentally distinct from it. There, candidate characteristics control
for voters’ preferences, and we study how being in a safe spot influences
candidates’ effort (proxied by their residualized vote-share). Here, we are
instead interested in studying voters’ preferences directly, and thus investigate
how different individual characteristics predict votes, while controlling for
advantaged status.


=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
Journal of Public Economics 234 (2024) 105133
11
J.H. Fiva et al.
Table 4
Post-electoral bargaining outcomes.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Seat share (percent)
0.983∗∗∗
0.983∗∗∗
0.981∗∗∗
1.000∗∗∗
0.999∗∗∗
(0.012)
(0.012)
(0.013)
(0.035)
(0.047)
Incumbents (percent)
0.014∗∗∗
0.015∗∗∗
0.019∗∗∗
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.006)
Women (percent)
0.009∗
0.011∗∗
0.013∗∗
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.006)
Seat share squared
−0.000
−0.001
(0.001)
(0.001)
Mean of outcome variable
17.46
17.46
17.46
17.46
17.46
R-squared
0.839
0.840
0.840
0.841
0.847
Observations
1800
1800
1800
1800
1800
Municipality FE
No
No
No
No
Yes
Notes: The sample consist of main party lists winning a seat in a local council in the 2019 election. The
dependent variable is the party’s percent of seats in the executive board. ‘‘Seat share’’ measure the percent of
seats the party holds in the council. ‘‘Incumbents’’ measure the percent of re-elected incumbents among the
elected candidates from the party. ‘‘Women’’ measure the percent of women among the elected candidates
from the party. Standard errors are clustered at the municipal level and reported in parentheses. * denotes
10% statistical significance, ** 5% and *** 1%.
as primary healthcare and education. The municipal board, serving
as the executive branch of local government, plays a pivotal role in
decision-making processes.
The board is elected by the council at the beginning of each electoral
period. While its composition should in principle reflect the seat-shares
in the council, parties retain some leeway. If no councilor demands that
the board members are selected via list-based proportional elections,33
its composition is decided on via a negotiated agreement. Furthermore,
even if no formal bargaining process takes place, there are fewer
positions in the board than seats in the council, which creates a degree
of disproportionality that the parties must resolve.
To investigate our hypothesis, we regress the share of board seats
that a party 𝑝in a municipality 𝑚at time 𝑡gets (𝐵𝑜𝑎𝑟𝑑𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑚𝑡) on
the share of women (𝑊𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑚𝑡) and the share of incumbents
(𝐼𝑛𝑐𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑚𝑡) elected within the party.
𝐵𝑜𝑎𝑟𝑑𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑚𝑡= 𝛼+𝛽𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑙𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑚𝑡+𝜒𝑊𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑚𝑡+𝛾𝐼𝑛𝑐𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑚𝑡+𝜇𝑝𝑚𝑡.
(7)
Despite close to one-to-one mapping between the council seat share
(𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑙𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑚𝑡) and board seat share, we see a statistically significant
bargaining boost associated with electing more incumbents or women
into the council. Table 4 shows that a 10%-points increase in incumbent
share results in about 1.4%-points increase in the party’s share of the
executive. In turn, a 10%-points increase in the share of women results
in a 1.1%-points increase in the parties share of the executive. Thus,
selecting incumbents and women candidates tends to improve a party’s
chance of occupying strategic positions in the executive board, even
controlling for the party’s seat-share in the council and its square. These
results are robust to considering the share of incumbent and women
both together and in separate regressions, as well as to the inclusion of
municipal fixed effects.
In this setting, electing experienced candidates may be valuable
for political parties because such candidates are better at navigating
the post-election bargaining process (as in Meriläinen and Tukiainen,
2022). Of course this does not exclude the possibility that parties could
tend to protect incumbents because these candidates themselves are
members of the local elite deciding how to allocate advantaged status.
Nonetheless, our results above suggest that selecting these experienced
33 In this case, each party (or groups of parties) puts forward a list of
candidates for the board, including up to twice the number of names relative to
the number of positions to be filled. Each list can only include elected council
members, and should cover at least 40 percent candidates of each gender ‘‘as
far as possible’’ (Local Government Act §7–5).
candidates provides an advantage to the party in the post-electoral
negotiations. To interpret the results on women, we note that when
the board is selected via list-based proportional elections, each list has
to include at least 40% of candidates of each gender (see Footnote 33).
Even when the board is instead formed via a negotiated agreement,
each councillor can anticipate that, if he or she demands that the
board is selected via proportional elections, the gender quota will
have to be respected. This credible threat inevitably constrains the
bargaining process. As such, these gender quotas may explain why
female candidates are more valuable for parties in the post-election
bargaining.
We note that these results on the prevalence of women and incum-
bents among candidates favored by political parties have substantial
economic relevance, since electing candidates with these characteristics
has been shown to impact policy and economic outcomes. Meriläinen
(2022) demonstrates that increasing the proportion of incumbents in
Finnish municipal councils positively influences fiscal sustainability
outcomes. In Germany, mayors with prior office experience tend to
reduce local public debt, lower total municipal expenditures, and de-
crease local taxes (Freier and Thomasius, 2016). Similarly, a plethora of
studies consistently underscores the significance of female representa-
tion. Hessami and da Fonseca (2020) surveys the literature, indicating
that in developing countries, increased female political representation
improves provision of public goods (Chattopadhyay and Duflo, 2004;
Clots-Figueras, 2011). In developed countries, evidence is more mixed,
but female representation is linked, for example, to the expansion
of public childcare (Baskaran and Hessami, 2024). Moreover, female
representation also contributes to enhanced institutional quality by
reducing corruption and rent extraction by those in power (Brollo and
Troiano, 2016).
More broadly, to the extent that electorally stronger parties are
better positioned to use their gatekeeping power to insulate their
preferred candidates, our findings indicate that this strategic advantage
may have a crucial effect on post-electoral outcomes, ultimately im-
pacting the distribution of power and decision-making in the political
arena. As we discuss further below, this dynamic can have far-reaching
consequences, including the allocation of resources, policy decisions,
and the overall direction of governance.
6. Discussion and conclusion
In this paper, we have delved into the intricate dynamics of political
parties and their strategic use of gatekeeping power. We have demon-
strated that parties encounter a tradeoff between incentivizing list
members to contribute to the party’s collective performance and shield-
ing preferred candidates from internal competition to secure them a


=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
Journal of Public Economics 234 (2024) 105133
12
J.H. Fiva et al.
seat. Our key contribution is to show, theoretically and empirically, that
this tradeoff is less pronounced for more popular parties, granting them
the ability to safeguard their preferred candidates without compromis-
ing their overall performance. Furthermore, our results suggest that this
strategic advantage translates into a disproportional influence of these
parties in post-electoral bargaining and policymaking processes.
While our focus has been on the case of Norway, the generalizability
of our results may extend beyond this specific context. List propor-
tional representation systems are used by 70 out of 199 countries,
which makes such systems the most used across the world (Reynolds
et al., 2008). In particular, flexible-list systems are used in many
other countries in the world, such as in Austria, Belgium, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Indonesia, Norway, Netherlands, Slovakia,
and Sweden (Crisp et al., 2013).
Furthermore, our key insights remain relevant outside the realm of
these flexible-list systems. Regardless of the specific institutional setting
they operate in, parties can in fact often face a tradeoff analogous to
the one we investigate here. For example, under proportional repre-
sentation with closed-list, political parties must choose how to rank
different candidates in their list (Buisseret et al., 2022). Here, parties
face a strategic choice of whether to position their strongest candidates
at the top or in the middle of the list. Existing works study the effect
of ideology and media exposure (Crutzen et al., 2024), consider how
the choice of candidate ranking is linked to the distribution of post-
electoral rents (Cox et al., 2021), or how strategic voting may generate
distortions in the ranking chosen by the party (Buisseret et al., 2022).
Our framework complements these works by highlighting how this
choice may be influenced by the effort vs. selection tradeoff. Placing the
strongest candidate in the middle of the list boosts the party’s overall
chances (as in the theories of Buisseret et al. (2022) and Crutzen et al.
(2024)), and thus the incentives for all candidates to exert more effort.
Instead, placing the strongest candidate at the top of the list ensures
they will obtain a seat, but reduces other candidates’ hopes of ever
winning a seat themselves and thus their motivation to invest costly
effort.
In systems of open-list proportional representation, the candidates’
ranking on the list is irrelevant. However, parties still control the
list composition. As Cheibub and Sin (2020) highlight, this choice
fundamentally alters the intensity of competition for seats within the
party. As such, applying our theoretical framework, parties may choose
to tilt the balance in favor of their preferred candidates by constructing
less competitive candidate lists, or they may seek more balanced com-
petition. The former strategy privileges selection at the expense of the
party’s collective performance, while the latter maximizes incentives
for effort but fails to protect specific candidates. Additionally, in such
systems parties also strategically determine how to allocate electoral
and logistical resources. They may opt for equal distribution among all
candidates or choose to grant advantages selectively. This choice is also
relevant under first past the post, where parties must allocate resources
across different districts (Snyder, 1989).
In sum, all these decision points involve incentives similar to those
captured in our model, transcending the specifics of any single electoral
system and offering valuable insights into the broader dynamics of
party politics. Our findings suggest that, in all these varied settings,
the tradeoffs involved in these strategic choices should be weaker
for ex-ante more popular parties. These parties are better positioned
to leverage their gatekeeping power to favor preferred candidates,
resulting in strategic advantages post-election.
Furthermore, these results underscore a crucial link between the
concentration of power within and across parties. In our framework,
this link emerges via two channels. First, parties with an advantage
in the intra-party contest use this leverage to insulate their preferred
candidates, concentrating advantages and resources within a select few.
Secondly, our results on post-electoral outcomes depict a narrative
where ‘power begets power.’ While more popular parties inherently
enjoy a stronger position, these findings highlight that their strategic
advantage in navigating the selection-control trade-off can reinforce
this effect.
Indeed, while our analysis focuses on the post-electoral bargaining
and decision-making process, it is plausible to speculate that the strate-
gic advantage in this domain would resonate across other domains,
further solidifying these parties’ position. For example, it may allow
advantaged parties to more effectively attract donations or campaign
contributions. Research in various contexts has established that holding
positions of power provides a strategic advantage in soliciting dona-
tions (Fouirnaies and Hall, 2014; Holbrook and Weinschenk, 2014). If
the capacity to safeguard specific candidates translates into a dispro-
portionate influence in the post-electoral process, we could anticipate a
corresponding comparative advantage in the realm of political finance.
Similarly, the credible promise of insulation from internal competition
and further gains in the post-electoral process may yield a strate-
gic advantage in recruiting high-quality candidates. Stronger political
candidates tend to also have better outside options in the private
market (Caselli and Morelli, 2002; Dal Bó et al., 2006; Messner and
Polborn, 2004). Consequently, parties may encounter challenges in
recruiting such promising candidates for political office. By offering
the assurance of a secure seat insulated from intra-party competition,
along with additional rewards post-election, more popular parties may
enjoy a privileged position in addressing this recruitment challenge.
Of course, ex-ante more popular parties inherently have an advantage
in navigating these challenges; our argument is that the possibility to
more effectively navigate the selection versus effort tradeoff further
amplifies this advantage (compared to a counterfactual world in which
this tradeoff equally constrains all parties).
These implications highlight the importance of keeping parties’
gatekeeping power in check. A recent body of scholarship analyzes
the impact of inter-party competition on intra-party dynamics and
organization (e.g., Invernizzi and Prato, 2023; Invernizzi, 2023). Our
findings contribute to this literature by emphasizing the significance of
addressing both sides of the equation. In this context, reforms aimed
at curbing parties’ influence over the candidate nomination process
(e.g., implementing open primaries, providing public funding for politi-
cal candidates, establishing independent candidate support services, or
introducing randomized ballot order) may not only promote intra-party
democracy but also safeguard the competitiveness and impartiality of
the entire political system.
Declaration of competing interest
The author(s) declare none
Data availability
The data that has been used is confidential.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary material related to this article can be found online
at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2024.105133.
References
Achury, Susan, Ramírez, Margarita, Cantú, Francisco, 2017. Endogenous ballot struc-
tures: The selection of open and closed lists in Colombia’s legislative elections.
Elect. Stud. 49, 136–154.
Aghion, Alesina, A., Trebbi, F., 2004. Endogenous political institutions. Q. J. Econ. 119,
565–611.
Baskaran,
Thushyanthan,
Hessami,
Zohal,
2024.
Women
in
political
bodies
as
policymakers. Rev. Econ. Stat. (forthcoming).
Bawn, Kathleen, Cohen, Martin, Karol, David, Masket, Seth, Noel, Hans, Zaller, John,
2012. A theory of political parties: Groups, policy demands and nominations in
American politics. Perspect. Politics 10 (3), 571–597.


=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
Journal of Public Economics 234 (2024) 105133
13
J.H. Fiva et al.
Benoit, Kenneth, 2000. Which electoral formula is the most proportional? A new look
with new evidence. Political Anal. 8 (4), 381–388.
Besley, Timothy, Montalvo, Jose G., Reynal-Querol, Marta, 2011. Do educated leaders
matter? Econ. J. 121 (554), F205–227.
Brollo, Fernanda, Troiano, Ugo, 2016. What happens when a woman wins an election?
Evidence from close races in Brazil. J. Dev. Econ. 122, 28–45.
Buisseret, Peter, Folke, Olle, Prato, Carlo, Rickne, Johanna, 2022. Party nomination
strategies in list proportional representation systems. Am. J. Political Sci. 66 (3),
714–729.
Buisseret, Peter, Prato, Carlo, 2022. Competing principals? Legislative representation
in list proportional representation systems. Am. J. Political Sci. 66 (1), 156–170.
Carreri, Maria, Payson, Julia, 2023. Local leaders and the pursuit of growth in US
cities: the role of managerial skill. Political Sci. Res. Methods 1–17.
Carroll, Royce, Nalepa, Monika, 2020. The personal vote and party cohesion: Modeling
the effects of electoral rules on intraparty politics. J. Theor. Politics 32 (1), 36–69.
Caselli, Francesco, Morelli, Massimo, 2002. Bad politicians. Q. J. Econ. 117 (4),
1369–1401.
Chattopadhyay, Raghabendra, Duflo, Esther, 2004. Women as policy makers: Evidence
from a randomized policy experiment in India. Econometrica 72 (5), 1409–1443.
Cheibub, José Antonio, Sin, Gisela, 2020. Preference vote and intra-party competition
in open list PR systems. J. Theor. Politics 32 (1), 70–95.
Cirone, Alexandra, Cox, Gary W., Fiva, Jon H., 2021. Seniority-based nominations and
political careers. Am. Political Sci. Rev. 115 (1), 234–251.
Clots-Figueras, Irma, 2011. Women in politics: Evidence from the Indian states. J. Public
Econ. 95 (7), 664–690.
Cohen, Marty, Karol, David, Noel, Hans, Zaller, John, 2008. The Party Decides:
Presidential Nominations Before and After Reform. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, IL.
Cox, Gary W., Fiva, Jon H., Smith, Daniel M., Sørensen, Rune J., 2021. Moral hazard
in electoral teams: List rank and campaign effort. J. Public Econ. 200, 104457.
Cox, Gary W., Nowacki, Tobias, 2023. The emergence of party-based political careers
in the United Kingdom, 1801–1918. J. Politics 85 (1), 178–191.
Crisp, Brian F., Olivella, Santiago, Malecki, Michael, Sher, Mindy, 2013. Vote-earning
strategies in flexible list systems: Seats at the price of unity. Elect. Stud. 32 (4),
658–669.
Crutzen, Benoit, Flamand, Sabine, Sahuguet, Nicolas, 2020. A model of team contest,
with an application to incentives under list proportional representation. J. Public
Econ. 120.
Crutzen, Benoit S.Y., Konishi, Hideo, Sahuguet, Nicolas, 2024. The best at the top?
Candidate ranking strategies under closed list proportional representation. Political
Sci. Res. Methods (forthcoming).
Crutzen, Benoit, Sahuguet, Nicholas, 2023a. Political parties in models of political
economy, a survey. Working Paper.
Crutzen, Benoît S.Y., Sahuguet, Nicolas, 2023b. Comparative politics with intraparty
candidate selection. Eur. J. Political Econ. 79, 102445.
Dal Bó, Ernesto, Dal Bó, Pedro, Di Tella, Rafael, 2006. ‘‘Plata o plomo?’’: bribe and
punishment in a theory of political influence. Am. Political Sci. Rev. 100 (1), 41–53.
Epstein, David, Brady, David, Kawato, Sadafumi, O’Halloran, Sharyn, 1997. A compar-
ative approach to legislative organization: Careerism and seniority in the United
States and Japan. Am. J. Political Sci. 41 (3), 965–998.
Eriksson, Lina M., Vernby, Kåre, 2021. Welcome to the party? Ethnicity and the
interaction between potential activists and party gatekeepers. J. Politics 83 (4),
1861–1866.
Field, Bonnie N., Siavelis, Peter M., 2008. Candidate selection procedures in transitional
polities: A research note. Party politics 14 (5), 620–639.
Fiva, Jon H., Folke, Olle, 2016. Mechanical and psychological effects of electoral
reform. Br. J. Political Sci. 46 (2), 265–279.
Fiva, Jon H., Halse, Askill, Natvik, Gisle James, 2023. Local government dataset.
Available at https://www.jon.fiva.no/data.htm.
Fiva, Jon H., Røhr, Helene Lie, 2018. Climbing the ranks: Incumbency effects in
party-list systems. Eur. Econ. Rev. 101, 142–156.
Fiva, Jon H., Sørensen, Rune J., Vøllo, Reidar, 2021. Local candidate dataset. Available
at https://www.jon.fiva.no/data.htm.
Fouirnaies, Alexander, Hall, Andrew B., 2014. The financial incumbency advantage:
Causes and consequences. J. Politics 76 (3), 711–724.
Freier, Ronny, Thomasius, Sebastian, 2016. Voters prefer more qualified mayors, but
does it matter for public finances? Evidence for Germany. Int. Tax Public Finance
23, 875–910.
Galasso, Vincenzo, Nannicini, Tommaso, 2011. Competing on good politicians. Am.
Political Sci. Rev. 105 (01), 79–99.
Gallagher, Michael, Marsh, Michael, 1988. Candidate selection in comparative perspec-
tive: The secret garden of politics. SAGE Modern Politics Series, vol. 18, SAGE
Publications Limited.
Hangartner, Dominik, Ruiz, Nelson A., Tukiainen, Janne, 2019. Open or closed? How
list type affects electoral performance, candidate selection, and campaign effort.
VATT Institute for Economic Research Working Papers 120. Available at SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3418767.
Hazan, Reuven Y., Rahat, Gideon, 2010. Democracy Within Parties: Candidate Selection
Methods and Their Political Consequences. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
Herron, Erik S., Pekkanen, Robert J., Shugart, Matthew S., 2018. The Oxford Handbook
of Electoral Systems. Oxford University Press.
Hessami, Zohal, da Fonseca, Mariana Lopes, 2020. Female political representation and
substantive effects on policies: A literature review. Eur. J. Political Econ. 63,
101896.
Holbrook, Thomas M., Weinschenk, Aaron C., 2014. Money, candidates, and mayoral
elections. Elect. Stud. 35, 292–302.
Holmström, Bengt, 1982. Moral hazard in teams. Bell J. Econ. 13 (2), 324–340.
Invernizzi, Giovanna M., 2023. Antagonistic cooperation: Factional competition in the
shadow of elections. Am. J. Political Sci. 67 (2), 426–439.
Invernizzi, Giovanna Maria, Prato, Carlo, 2023. Bending the iron law. Available at
SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3462071.
Kselman,
Daniel
M.,
2020.
Public
goods
equilibria
under
closed-and
open-list
proportional representation. J. Theor. Politics 32 (1), 112–142.
Leemann, Lucas, Mares, Isabela, 2014. The adoption of proportional representation. J.
Politics 76 (2), 461–478.
McCarty, Nolan, Schickler, Eric, 2018. On the theory of parties. Annu. Rev. Political
Sci. 21 (1), 175–193.
McKelvey, Richard D., Riezman, Rayman, 1992. Seniority in legislatures. Am. Political
Sci. Rev. 86, 951–965.
Meriläinen, Jaakko, 2022. Political selection and economic policy. Econ. J. 132 (648),
3020–3046.
Meriläinen, Jaakko, Tukiainen, Janne, 2022. The advantage of incumbents in coalitional
bargaining. Legislative Stud. Q. 47 (4), 921–957.
Messner, Matthias, Polborn, Mattias K., 2004. Paying politicians. J. Public Econ. 88
(12), 2423–2445.
Reynolds, Andrew, Reilly, Ben, Ellis, Andrew, 2008. Electoral System Design: The New
International IDEA Handbook. International Institute for Democracy and Electoral
Assistance, Oxford, UK.
Snyder, James M., 1989. Election goals and the allocation of campaign resources.
Econometrica 57 (3), 637–660.
Stokes, S.C., 1999. Political parties and democracy. Annu. Rev. Political Sci. 2 (1),
243–267.
