=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
 
http://cps.sagepub.com/
Comparative Political Studies
 
http://cps.sagepub.com/content/32/4/487
The online version of this article can be found at:
 
DOI: 10.1177/0010414099032004004
 1999 32: 487
Comparative Political Studies
DAVID J. SAMUELS
Evidence from Brazil
Incentives to Cultivate a Party Vote in Candidate-centric Electoral Systems:
 
 
Published by:
 
http://www.sagepublications.com
 can be found at:
Comparative Political Studies
Additional services and information for 
 
 
 
 
 
http://cps.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
Email Alerts: 
 
 
http://cps.sagepub.com/subscriptions
Subscriptions: 
 
 
http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav
Reprints: 
 
 
http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
Permissions: 
 
 
http://cps.sagepub.com/content/32/4/487.refs.html
Citations: 
 
 
What is This?
 
- Jun 1, 1999
Version of Record 
>> 
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
COMPARATIVE POLITICAL STUDIES / June 1999
Samuels / CULTIVATING THE VOTE IN CANDIDATE-CENTRIC SYSTEMS
A prominent question in comparative electoral studies concerns the so-called personal vote.
Typically, scholars approach this question at a cross-national as opposed to a cross-party level. In
this article, in contrast, the author focuses on the characteristics of parties, as opposed to the char-
acteristics of electoral systems, as determinants of candidates’personal vote seeking. The author
argues that a candidate’s adoption of an individualistic or collective strategy depends largely on
centralized or decentralized nomination control in his party, his party’s alliance options, and his
access to and control over funding and patronage. The author explores the Brazilian case, testing
his claims at the national and district level using multiple regression analysis. Furthermore, he
explains how one party, the Partido dos Trabalhadores (Workers’ Party, PT), has overcome the
incentives of the electoral system.
INCENTIVES TO CULTIVATE A PARTY
VOTE IN CANDIDATE-CENTRIC
ELECTORAL SYSTEMS
Evidence From Brazil
DAVID J. SAMUELS
University of Minnesota
A
prominent question in comparative electoral studies concerns the so-
called personal vote. Typically, scholars have approached this question
at a cross-national as opposed to a cross-party level: They highlight features
of national electoral systems that create incentives for individual politicians
to pursue a personal (or a party) vote rather than highlighting features of par-
ties that might predispose candidates in those parties to pursue personal (or
party) votes. In this article, I will focus on the characteristics of parties, as
487
AUTHOR’S NOTE: I thank Scott Basinger, Gary Cox, James Druckman, Kaare Strom, and
threeanonymousreviewersfortheir suggestions. I also thank Octávio Amorim Neto and Rogério
Schmitt for providing data. The Center for Iberian and Latin American Studies at the University
ofCalifornia,SanDiego,provided research support for fieldwork during the summer of 1995.
COMPARATIVE POLITICAL STUDIES, Vol. 32 No. 4, June 1999 487-518
© 1999 Sage Publications, Inc.
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
opposed to the characteristics of electoral systems, as determinants of candi-
dates’ personal vote seeking.
Of course, any study of how party characteristics affect the balance of per-
sonal versus party vote seeking by a given party’s candidates must hold elec-
toral structure constant (just as studies of the impact of electoral structure
implicitly hold party features constant). Here I focus on a class of electoral
systems that promote, or even require, personal vote strategies—what I call
candidate-centric electoral systems. I define this class more precisely later in
this article, but for now, suffice it to say that it includes the Single Non-
Transferable Vote (SNTV) system, the Single Transferable Vote (STV) sys-
tem, Open-List Proportional Representation (PR) systems in general, and
Brazil’s version of Open-List PR in particular. Given a candidate-centric
electoral environment, I ask how politicians can buck the trend by strategi-
cally developing party institutions that overcome the electoral system’s push
toward individualism.
Brazil is an interesting case both because its politics are notoriously
individualistic and because Brazilian voters have the option—unusual in
candidate-centric systems—of casting a label vote (by voting for a party
number on the ballot).
1 When Brazilians cast a vote for a particular candidate,
it seems natural to interpret this as in large part an expression of personal sup-
port (even though the vote does pool). When they vote for the party label as a
whole, foregoing the opportunity to support any particular candidate, it
seems natural to interpret this as, in large part, an expression of party support.
The label vote percentage thus naturally measures the balance of party versus
personal votes that each party receives.
This article shows that although individualism is a likely strategy under
candidate-centric electoral rules in general and does indeed pervade Brazil-
ian politics in particular, a collective electoral strategy under these electoral
systems is both theoretically possible and empirically detectable (at least in
Brazil). I demonstrate that the level of label votes that a party receives varies
considerably in Brazil and is related to party structural features, including the
nature of nomination control, candidates’access to pork and campaign funds,
and alliance strategy. These findings are interesting in the Brazilian case
because they do not gibe with previous suggestions that high label voting per-
centages are mostly a function of leftist ideology (Mainwaring, 1992, p. 688).
Moreover, these considerations should generalize across all candidate-
centric electoral systems; thus, this article opens the path to future compara-
tive work at the cross-party level.
488
COMPARATIVE POLITICAL STUDIES / June 1999
1. Italy (1945-1993) had a similar system.
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
The structure of the article is as follows: Section 2 reviews the literature
and articulates hypotheses about electoral competition under candidate-
centric electoral systems. Section 3 places this framework in the Brazilian
context and reviews the conventional wisdom about Brazilian politics. Sec-
tion 4 applies the hypotheses from Section 2, presenting quantitative evi-
dence to support the hypotheses. Section 5 uses qualitative evidence to
explain how one Brazilian party, the Partido dos Trabalhadores (Workers’
Party, PT), has institutionalized its party label over the long term, overcoming
the Brazilian system’s notorious incentives for individualism. Although
many parties receive relatively high percentages of label votes in the short-
to-medium term, the PT is the only large Brazilian party that consistently
receives a high level of label votes, and its ability to institutionalize its label in
the long term merits special attention. Section 6 concludes.
ELECTORAL INCENTIVES UNDER
CANDIDATE-CENTRIC ELECTORAL RULES
LITERATURE REVIEW AND JUSTIFICATION FOR NEW APPROACH
In this article, I do not assume that parties are unitary actors; individual
candidates are my basic units of analysis. Existing efforts to model candidate
behavior under different electoral systems are inadequate for the task at hand
because they implicitly hold party features and candidate attributes constant
in order to focus on variations in national electoral institutions.
Consider, for example, Carey and Shugart’s (1995) contrast between
SNTV and closed-list PR (one part of their larger project of rank-ordering
electoral systems’propensity to generate incentives to seek a personal vote).
Clearly, SNTV produces more incentives to individualism. However, the
Japanese Buddhist Kômeitô Party—famous for the discipline and obedience
of its voters—obviously overcame these incentives (Hrebenar, 1992), as did
the Japanese Communist Party. If we compared the Kômeitô to a factional-
ized party under closed-list PR, our expectations about candidate behavior
based on the electoral system comparison would be largely counteracted by
not holding party characteristics constant. A related point is that not all candi-
dates and parties pursue the same strategy within a given electoral system.
2
Or, consider Myerson’s (1993) argument that candidates in certain elec-
toral systems have greater incentives to seek the support of special interests or
Samuels / CULTIVATING THE VOTE IN CANDIDATE-CENTRIC SYSTEMS
489
2. For example, in Italy, party strategy may have influenced the tendency for voters to use
one or more of their preference votes (Katz, 1985).
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
favored minorities. To focus on the effects of the differing electoral systems,
Myerson explicitly holds other features constant, such as candidates’ ability
to make credible pork-barreling promises to voters. Then, he explains to what
extent and how candidates exploit their resources under different electoral
systems.
Similar to Myerson (1993) and Carey and Shugart (1995), I am interested
in the incentives to cultivate a personal or party vote. However, I differ from
these analysts in that I do not hold party features constant. In contrast to
Myerson, I am interested precisely in the case in which candidates may not
have equal capabilities to make credible commitments to distribute resources
so that some candidates may find campaigning on other grounds more
attractive.
In sum, research on the impact of electoral rules has ignored cross-party
variation within electoral systems, and we have some prima facie evidence
that some candidates in some parties buck the trend. In the next section, I
detail the set of electoral systems that my argument covers. Subsequently, I
explain the logic of electoral competition under these rules and then hypothe-
size how candidates might overcome the incentives that the electoral system
generates.
THE ELECTORAL SYSTEMS COVERED
The framework I develop covers electoral systems that satisfy the follow-
ing criteria: (a) Voting options: Each voter has the option of casting one or
more votes directly for candidates. Voters may also have the option of casting
a list vote; (b) District magnitude: Each electoral district returns more than
one member to the assembly; and (c) Seat allocation: If there are no party
lists, then candidates receive seats in order of their vote totals: The top M
vote-getters receive seats in an M-seat district. If there are party lists, then the
seats are awarded to the candidates on each list in accord with the votes that
each candidate on the list receives: The top M vote-getting candidates receive
seats on a list that wins M seats.
The real-world electoral systems that satisfy these criteria include STV
systems in which M > 1 (e.g., Ireland, Malta, Australia’s Senate); SNTV sys-
temsinwhichM>1(e.g.,pre-1994Japan,Taiwan);andOpen-ListPR systems
(e.g., Poland, Finland, Chile, Brazil, pre-1994 Italy).
3 I call these systems
candidate-centric electoral systems because they all tend to push candidates
490
COMPARATIVE POLITICAL STUDIES / June 1999
3. These criteria thus exclude all Closed-List Proportional Representation (PR) systems, all
electoral systems in which district magnitude equals 1, and some other PR systems (see Carey &
Shugart, 1995).
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
toward self-promotion rather than toward promoting the party’s collective
identity.
THE LOGIC OF THE PERSONAL VOTE IN
CANDIDATE-CENTRIC ELECTORAL SYSTEMS
Given the institutional criteria distinguishing candidate-centric electoral
systems, if there are multiple candidates per party per district, then these can-
didates cannot rely solely on the party label to get elected. Therefore, candi-
dates must adopt some degree of individualism as an electoral strategy to dif-
ferentiate themselves from their copartisans. Let us assume that the electoral
system is exogenous, that politicians understand the effects of the electoral
rules, and that when they begin to play the electoral game, they associate with
like-minded politicians to form parties that further their own personal gain.
Subsequently, these office-seeking politicians might (or might not)
believe that intraparty competition will harm more than help their career
prospects; thus, they might structure their party so as to overcome the incen-
tives that the electoral system imposes. What is the range of potential strate-
gies that politicians could adopt under these electoral systems? Consider
three simple potential strategies that move from individualistic to collective.
First, politicians could structure internal party rules to allow completely
unregulated individualism. Candidates would deliver their own pork and
claim their own credit. They would take their own policy stands, again on
their own account. If targeting pork or policy appeals meant stealing votes
from their copartisans, then so be it.
Second, they could opt to regulate candidates’ individualism. Here, each
member of the list would still fend for himself or herself, but candidates
would devise mechanisms to minimize the amount of direct intraparty com-
petition through nomination control or by setting up bailiwicks and niches
and sanctioning copartisans who violated party guidelines.
Third, politicians could attempt to cultivate a collective reputation. This
can be done over and above option two and would entail developing a party
platform. The party would require candidates to publicize the platform and
prohibit them from dissenting from it. Pork-based individualism is not incon-
sistent with this type of strategy, but policy-based individualism is.
Politicians clearly possess a range of options under this set of electoral
systems, and we have no a priori reason to assume that candidates in all par-
ties will adopt similar strategies: Even if all candidates face similar electoral
incentives, they still require the wherewithal to pursue a given strategy.
What might encourage candidates to fight against the incentives that the
electoral rules impose? I assume that in any electoral system, some portion of
Samuels / CULTIVATING THE VOTE IN CANDIDATE-CENTRIC SYSTEMS
491
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
the electorate, and some politicians, have clear preferences over issues of
public policy and do not want only divisible pork-barrel goods, and I assume
that in any mass electoral system, voters possess few incentives to acquire
information about candidates and parties (Downs, 1957). Given these assump-
tions, the extent to which voters can generalize about candidate behavior
based on their image of the candidate’s party as a whole is potentially impor-
tant. Party labels could serve as cues, a way for voters cheaply to reduce their
uncertainty about parties and politicians (Popkin, 1990). Voters might also
vote for the label, instead of a candidate, if they trust and can distinguish their
“brand name” and are indifferent across the party’s individual candidates.
For individual politicians, under certain conditions, a party label could
thus serve as a low-cost, high-return investment. Even in places such as
Japan, Italy, and Brazil, notorious for their clientelistic politics, a candidate’s
efforts to articulate his or her party’s collective image might reap a reward of
voters who are either unreachable by private-goods distribution schemes
(because they are outside of patronage networks) or who actively seek
policy-oriented parties. Politicians in every party in candidate-centric elec-
toral systems must choose between investing in their own reputation or in
their party’s reputation. They can seek votes by either distributing pork or
adopting policy positions or, more realistically, by adopting a strategy that
mixes individual and collective appeals.
4 In the next section, I present
hypotheses that explain when candidates in these electoral systems might
adopt either individualistic or collectivistic strategies.
HYPOTHESES
In the abstract, candidate-centric electoral systems create strong incen-
tives for personalism.
5 However, I hypothesize that in the short-to-medium
term, the extent to which candidates adopt a collectivistic or individualistic
strategy depends on (a) the degree to which access to the ballot is centralized
or decentralized, (b) the extent of candidates’ access to campaign finance
resources and whether access is centralized or decentralized, (c) the extent of
candidates’ access to office benefits (Strom, 1990)
6 and whether access is
492
COMPARATIVE POLITICAL STUDIES / June 1999
4. I do not mean to imply that the two strategies are necessarily mutually exclusive. Also, as
noted earlier, it is possible to use policy to pursue a personal vote. However, from this point for-
ward I use the word policy to mean a collective, party-platform policy appeal.
5. I take electoral systems to be exogenous in this article: Politicians, when they create par-
ties,respondtothesystem’sincentives and continue to respond as if the system were exogenous.
6. Strom (1990) defines offices benefits as government portfolios and “private goods
bestowed on recipients of politically discretionary governmental and subgovernmental appoint-
ments” (p. 567).
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
centralized or decentralized, and (d) alliance opportunities and other features
of each country’s electoral system.
Hypothesis 1: Nomination Control and Label Voting
First, if nominations are centrally controlled, then all candidates owe their
political careers, and hence their political allegiance, to the party. In such par-
ties, we would expect candidates to more willingly stick to policy appeals that
the party leadership dictates, regardless of the electoral structure. On the
other hand, if nomination control is decentralized, then individual candidates
will not feel as beholden to party policy makers. Even in Japan’s personalistic
SNTV system, for example, the Japanese Communist Party (JCP) and the
Kômeitô both control nominations tightly and receive strict adherence to the
party’s policy line from its members (Hrebenar, 1992, p. 83).
Hypothesis 2: Campaign Finance and Label Voting
Second, personalism is an expensive strategy requiring resources that not
all candidates possess or can obtain. Consequently, resource-poor candidates
might not opt for a personalistic strategy simply because they cannot afford it.
Candidates who can raise campaign contributions from a support network (in
exchange for pork, special regulatory exemptions, etc.) are well situated to
play the personal vote game (e.g., the Liberal Democratic Party [LDP], most
Brazilian parties). In contrast, those who cannot raise money may instead opt
to form parties in which the label stands for something. Adopting a label-
promoting strategy may reap votes where money cannot buy them.
Whether a party centrally controls campaign finance might also influence
candidates’ strategies. A party that can turn the finance spigot on or off can
credibly threaten candidates who deviate from the party line, whereas candi-
dates responsible for their own fundraising might have the independence to
ignore such threats.
Hypothesis 3: Access to Pork and Label Voting
Third, candidates who associate with the government so that they can
access and deliver patronage resources such as pork-barrel projects can
afford to and are expected to rely on their individual ability to “bring home
the bacon” rather than on their party’s programmatic platform. Even if candi-
dates mix a pork-and-policy strategy, we expect them to rely relatively more
on individualistic appeals than those without access to pork. Thus, those who
cannot rely on government patronage, such as those with poor access to
Samuels / CULTIVATING THE VOTE IN CANDIDATE-CENTRIC SYSTEMS
493
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
campaign finance, may opt to rely on cheaper campaign strategies such as
promotion of a label.
The extent to which the party centralizes or decentralizes control over
pork will also influence candidate strategies. For example, in Brazil
(1945-1964 and 1982-present), individual deputies seek pork largely without
party leadership mediation (Ames, 1995a, 1995b), whereas central party
leadership under Chile’s Open-List PR system prior to 1973 apparently
mediated access to patronage (Valenzuela, 1977). Analysts agree that Chil-
ean parties prior to 1973 had stronger organizations than their Brazilian
counterparts and that voters responded to party-label appeals more in Chile
than in Brazil (cf. Mainwaring, 1995).
Hypothesis 4: Alliance Strategy or Other Rules
Fourth, we must also consider the specific quirks in each electoral system
that might influence whether candidates adopt a label-enhancing or individu-
alistic strategy. For example, allowing multiparty alliances in Open-List sys-
tems could push candidates to pay less attention to their party’s label and
more attention to their own reputation in order to increase their chances of
victory within the alliance, as in Italy (Katz, 1985) and Brazil (see below for
details).
In the long run, the four factors that I hypothesize as influencing candidate
strategy are endogenous: Candidates may decide, for one reason or another,
to develop party rules that tend to conform with or counteract incentives
derived from the electoral rules or resource access. In Section 5, I explore the
question of when and why individual politicians would create such institu-
tions with lasting impact, given their resources and political goals, for one
party in Brazil. I claim, however, that in the short term, these factors are
“sticky.” They are exogenous for any given individual candidate and will
affect his or her propensity to promote the party label.
In sum, the way candidates access the slate and the extent and way in
which candidates access resources vary within candidate-centric systems.
These factors are fairly general. Specific quirks in each electoral system, such
as alliance possibilities, could also vary quite widely across candidate-
centric systems. For each case analyzed, we will have to combine the general
hypotheses with details about how candidates and parties respond to the spe-
cific rules of the game. In any case, these variables should account for the dif-
ferences observed in the degree to which candidates promote a party label or
their own personal reputation under candidate-centric electoral systems. In
the next section, I specify how parties respond to the rules in Brazil.
494
COMPARATIVE POLITICAL STUDIES / June 1999
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
BRAZILIAN POLITICAL
INDIVIDUALISM—THE CONVENTIONAL WISDOM
In this section, I will first describe the conventional wisdom about Brazil-
ian parties and then elaborate hypotheses that follow directly from those
articulated in the previous section. In the next section, I present empirical evi-
dence that supports my hypotheses.
Little empirical research exists on postauthoritarian Brazilian political
parties because few political scientists believe they warrant attention as col-
lective actors.
7 Brazilian parties have historically been weak, decentralized
alliances of patronage machines, tools of local or regional leaders who rely
on access to public resources to build and maintain a support base. Parties as
collective actors are little involved in legislative policy making. Instead, con-
gressional deputies trade votes on policy issues for patronage served up by
the executive (Ames, 1995a, 1995b; Avelino Filho, 1994; Mainwaring, 1991,
1992; Novaes, 1993).
Brazil’s electoral rules are said to perpetuate this political individualism.
Brazilian voters can vote directly for an individual candidate (by writing in
the candidate’s name or number) or for a party’s entire label (by writing in the
party’s name or number). From the candidates’perspective, the incentives for
individualism are clear: The party’s total list vote equals the sum of the par-
ty’s candidates’votes plus its party-label votes. If a candidate’s party wins M
seats, then those seats go to the M candidates on the list with the most candi-
date votes. Each candidate, therefore, always prefers a vote for himself or
herself (which boosts both the party’s expected seat total and the candidate’s
chances of getting one of those seats) over a party-label vote (which has only
the first effect) and prefers a label vote only over a vote for another party’s
candidates or label.
Other institutional factors augment the incentives for individualism in
Brazil. For example, district magnitude for national elections ranges from 8
to 70, and parties can nominate as many candidates as there are seats. If par-
ties enter an electoral alliance, the alliance can run up to 1.5 candidates per
seat. This permits an alliance to place 105 names on the ballot for federal dep-
uty (70 seats) in the state of São Paulo, where in 1990 there were 610 candi-
dates for federal deputy (Lamounier, 1991, p. 57). Thus, although not every
party fills its slate, the number of both potential and actual candidates within
a district is staggering. To stand out in this school of political sharks under
Open-List PR, a politician must focus at least some energy, if not most
energy, on his or her own personal attributes instead of on the party’s.
Samuels / CULTIVATING THE VOTE IN CANDIDATE-CENTRIC SYSTEMS
495
7. Exceptions include Keck (1992) and Meneguello (1989).
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
All told, Open-List proportional representation generates tremendously
individualistic incentives because parties do not control the candidates’rank
on the list and candidates must compete against their copartisans. The result-
ing intraparty competition hinders party cohesion and promotes individualis-
tic electoral appeals (Ames, 1995b; Mainwaring, 1992). To get the personal
votes that they need, Brazilian candidates rely largely on their patronage
credit-claiming ability (Ames, 1995a). Most research on Brazilian electoral
politics has focused on the goals of individual politicians instead of parties,
ignoring the possibility that a trade-off between individual and collective
electoral strategy might exist.
EVALUATING THE HYPOTHESES
Hypothesis 1: Nomination Control
First, because all parties in Brazil, including the PT, decentralize nomina-
tion control to the district (state) level, I cannot test for this variable’s impact
across Brazilian parties. However, as I describe in Section 5, parties can enact
provisions to counteract this rule’s impact.
Hypothesis 2: Access to Campaign Finance
Second, I can confirm that campaign finance is highly decentralized in all
parties. Most party organizations are weak, and candidates in all parties,
including the PT, are responsible for financing their own campaigns, which
are quite expensive (Ames, 1995a; Mainwaring, in press).
Nevertheless, substantial variations in the extent of campaign finance can-
didates can appear to exist across parties in Brazil. This raises the possibility,
as Hypothesis 2 suggests, that poorer candidates cannot afford personalistic
strategies, whereas wealthier candidates rely less on their party label and
more on individual appeals. Although campaign expenditure data are
unavailable, in 1994, the Brazilian electoral court (Tribunal Superior Eleito-
ral, TSE) required candidates to declare how much they had received in cam-
paign donations. With this data, we obtain an indication of the relative influ-
ence of money across parties (see Appendix B on the data). Table 1 indicates
the average declared donation per party for federal deputy (in reals, nominal
1994 values, when the real was worth approximately U.S.$1), the standard
deviation of the average donation, and the number of candidates who pre-
sented declarations.
496
COMPARATIVE POLITICAL STUDIES / June 1999
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
Of the five leftist parties—PT, Partido Comunista do Brasil (Communist
Party of Brazil, PCdoB), Partido Comunista Brasileiro/Partido Popular
Socialista (Brazilian Communist Party/Popular Socialist Party, PCB/PPS),
Partido Socialista Brasileiro (Brazilian Socialist Party, PSB), and Partido
Democrático Trabalhador (Democratic Labor Party, PDT)—the PT not only
has the lowest average donation per candidate but also has the lowest stan-
dard deviation as a percentage of the average donation. Similarly, the PT has a
far lower average donation per candidate than any of the other major center or
rightist parties—Partido Progressista Reformador (Progressive Reform
Party, PPR), Partido Trabalhista Brasileiro (Brazilian Labor Party, PTB), Par-
tido do Movimento Democrático Brasileiro (Party of the Brazilian
Samuels / CULTIVATING THE VOTE IN CANDIDATE-CENTRIC SYSTEMS
497
Table 1
Average Campaign Donations Received in 1994 Federal Deputy Elections
Party
No. of Candidates
Average Donation
SD
PCdoB
17
28452.79
27341.81
PCB/PPS
15
16144.99
14389.81
PT
214
10180.41
5809.46
PSB
45
27967.83
48419.35
PDT
148
22192.62
20783.84
PSDB
173
85397.41
96733.90
PMDB
272
59194.55
39836.14
PP
88
61930.14
49790.37
PTB
108
67815.49
66458.34
PFL
161
66617.72
43097.70
PSC
25
18239.76
23492.49
PRN
7
48845.83
62802.31
PL
71
31714.60
43466.88
PDC
2
14000.00
X
PDS/PPR
110
43806.64
41900.31
PRONA
9
1047.21
778.82
Note: PCdoB = Partido Comunista do Brasil (Communist Party of Brazil), PCB/PPS = Partido
Comunista Brasileiro/Partido Popular Socialista (Brazilian Communist Party/Popular Socialist
Party), PT = Partido dos Trabalhadores (Workers’ Party), PSB = Partido Socialista Brasileiro
(Brazilian Socialist Party), PDT = Partido Democrático Trabalhador (Democratic Labor Party),
PSDB = Partido da Social-Democracia Brasileira (Brazilian Social-Democratic Party),
PMDB = Partido do Movimento Democrático Brasileiro (Party of the Brazilian Democratic
Movement), PP = Partido Popular (Popular Party), PTB = Partido Trabalhista Brasileiro (Brazil-
ian Labor Party), PFL = Partido da Frente Liberal (Party of the Liberal Front), PSC = Partido So-
cial Cristão (Social Christian Party), PRN = Partido da Reconstrução Nacional (National Recon-
struction Party), PL = Partido Liberal (Liberal Party), PDC = Partido Democrático Cristão
(Christian Democratic Party), PDS/PPR = Partido Democrático Social/Partido Progressista Re-
formador (Social Democratic Party/Progressive Reform Party), and PRONA = Partido da Reedi-
ficação da Ordem Nacional (Party for the Reedification of National Order)
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
Democratic Movement, PMDB), Partido da Social-Democracia Brasileira
(Brazilian Social-Democratic Party, PSDB), Partido da Frente Liberal (Party
of the Liberal Front, PFL), and Partido Popular (Popular Party, PP)—and its
standard deviation as a percentage of the average is also lower. The data
include declarations from both winning and losing candidates, so it is not sur-
prising to see wide standard deviations. However, the PT’s lower average and
lower standard deviation indicates that in general even its winning candidates
rely less on money. Only the Partido da Reedificação da Ordem Nacional
(Party for the Reedification of National Order, PRONA), a small right-wing
party that relies on the personalistic leadership of its president, and which
receives high label votes for legislative elections, demonstrates lower per-
candidate spending. This provides some evidence that in general PT candi-
dates rely less on money to finance their campaigns. I statistically test for the
effect of access to campaign finance on label voting in the next section.
Hypothesis 3: Access to Pork and Label Voting
Third, for all parties, central party organizations do not control access to
government pork. Because Brazil’s president typically has to compose a mul-
tiparty congressional coalition (Amorim Neto, 1995), many parties may hold
ministerial or other government positions that provide access to particularis-
tic goods.
8 Deputies, senators, mayors, and state-government officials seek
pork on their own, without party mediation. As Hypothesis 3 suggests, I
expect parties with good access to pork to see lower label voting. I test for the
effect of access to federal pork in the next section.
Hypothesis 4: Alliance Strategy and Label Voting
The last variable in Brazil affecting the choice of an individualistic or col-
lective electoral strategy is the ability or willingness of a candidate in a party
to decide to enter electoral alliances for legislative elections. In Brazil, label
votes for a party in an alliance are added to the votes for the whole alliance,
not to the party’s candidates alone. Therefore, whether a party is from the left
or the right of the spectrum, if it enters an alliance, its candidates have incen-
tives to direct votes away from the label and toward themselves.
9
498
COMPARATIVE POLITICAL STUDIES / June 1999
8. Much pork in Brazil can be found at the state and local level. Although testing for the
influence of such access would be useful, such an effort is beyond the scope of this article.
9. A candidate values a personal vote most highly, a label vote for his or her party in a
single-party list second, a label vote for his or her party in a multiparty list third, and a vote for
another party’s candidates or label last.
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
Small parties feel this problem especially acutely because they often
attempt to free-ride off of a larger party in an alliance by strategically restrict-
ing the number of candidates that they place on the ballot within the alliance
and concentrating their vote on those candidates. Because those candidates
who win are those with the highest personal vote totals, candidates from
small parties in alliances must downplay the label vote. If they emphasize
their party label and downplay the names within the alliance, they may not get
enough personal votes to obtain a seat. A party in an alliance is thus expected
to seek and reap fewer label votes than a party not in an alliance. I test for this
effect in Section 4.
THE FRAMEWORK APPLIED
AGGREGATE ELECTORAL DATA
This section applies the argument empirically. First, I present aggregate
electoral returns, noting that the variation in the percentage of these parties’
total votes that come in the form of label votes seems to follow the logic of the
argument spelled out above. I then present a more systematic multivariate
analysis at the district level of a party’s label vote percentages that confirms
the general validity of the approach.
Table 2 lists the percentages of each party’s total votes that were given to
the party label in the 1986, 1990, and 1994 Brazilian congressional elections
(this table only includes the 15 largest national parties). The parties’ initials
are in the first column, with leftist parties at the top, moving to the right of the
political spectrum as one moves down the list. An X indicates that the party
did not compete or did not exist for that year’s election. For reference, I
include parallel information that indicates the party’s total vote percentage
(Tribunal Regional Eleitoral, 1986; Tribunal Superior Eleitoral, 1990; Tribu-
nal Superior Eleitoral, 1994).
Table 2 reveals what existing studies have suggested: Most Brazilian par-
ties fail to attract many label votes. However, Table 2 also illustrates that label
vote percentages vary and shows how much the PT differs from other parties
over the last decade. Note that although in 1986 several parties received high
percentages of label votes, the PT doubled its label vote between 1986 and
1990, and by 1994, among the large parties, only the PT managed to exten-
sively promote the label. In 1994, excluding parties that received less than 1%
of the national vote, the PT obtained label votes at more than 3 times the rate
of its nearest competitor. Overall, the aggregate results demonstrate that only
Samuels / CULTIVATING THE VOTE IN CANDIDATE-CENTRIC SYSTEMS
499
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
the PT has consistently gained a high level of label votes over time.
10 This fits
the hypotheses articulated above because PT candidates are resource poor,
lack access to patronage, and the PT has been so successful at cultivating a
label that when it enters alliances, other parties now free ride off of the PT’s
popularity. On the other hand, because candidates in other parties have more
500
COMPARATIVE POLITICAL STUDIES / June 1999
Table 2
National Percentage of Party-Label Vote and National Percentage of Vote
% Label
% Total
1986
1990
1994
1986
1990
1994
Left
PCdoB
15.6
17.2
1.8
0.7
0.8
1.2
PCB/PPS
20.3
22.5
2.9
1.0
1.0
0.6
PT
22.7
43.3
33.1
6.6
10.5
12.8
PSB
8.7
8.6
2.1
1.1
2.0
2.2
PDT
13.5
23.6
5.3
6.4
10.5
7.2
PSDB
X
9.4
10.9
X
8.7
13.9
PMDB
15
16.1
3.6
45.7
19.0
20.3
PP
X
X
0.6
X
X
6.9
PTB
19.1
12.4
2.3
5.4
6.0
5.2
PFL
4.7
6.9
1.4
14.2
12.5
12.9
PSC
6.4
19.9
6.5
1.4
0.8
0.5
PRN
X
11.9
28
X
6.8
0.4
PL
3.3
9.8
2.2
3.4
4.3
3.5
PDC
18.1
9.3
X
0.8
2.7
X
PDS/PPR
24.6
28.5
2.1
6.7
9.6
9.4
Right
PRONA
X
54.7
81.7
X
0.03
0.7
Note: X = party did not compete or did not exist for that year’s election. PCdoB = Partido Comu-
nista do Brasil (Communist Party of Brazil), PCB/PPS = Partido Comunista Brasileiro/Partido
Popular Socialista (Brazilian Communist Party/Popular Socialist Party), PT = Partido dos Tra-
balhadores (Workers’ Party), PSB = Partido Socialista Brasileiro (Brazilian Socialist Party),
PDT = Partido Democrático Trabalhador (Democratic Labor Party), PSDB = Partido da Social-
Democracia Brasileira (Brazilian Social-Democratic Party), PMDB = Partido do Movimento
Democrático Brasileiro (Party of the Brazilian Democratic Movement), PP = Partido Popular
(Popular Party), PTB = Partido Trabalhista Brasileiro (Brazilian Labor Party), PFL = Partido da
Frente Liberal (Party of the Liberal Front), PSC = Partido Social Cristão (Social Christian Party),
PRN = Partido da Reconstrução Nacional (National Reconstruction Party), PL = Partido Liberal
(Liberal Party), PDC = Partido Democrático Cristão (Christian Democratic Party), PDS/PPR =
Partido Democrático Social/Partido Progressista Reformador (Social Democratic Party/Pro-
gressive Reform Party), and PRONA = Partido da Reedificação da Ordem Nacional (Party for
the Reedification of National Order)
10. I want to emphasize the word consistently. The PDS/PPR received a relatively high per-
centage of label votes in 1986 and 1990, but its leader, Paulo Maluf, then destroyed any appeal its
label might have had by confusing voters and changing the party’s name yet again in 1993 to the
PPB. The PPB is known more for its personalistic leader, Paulo Maluf, who happens to be con-
servative, than for having a leader who happens to be personalistic and espouses a particular con-
servative ideology. Moreover, the PPB’s label appeal appears linked somehow to Maluf. Nation-
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
access to money and patronage, their parties’ label-vote performance con-
forms to the conventional wisdom articulated above.
Table 2 also reveals the absence of a pattern across the political spectrum,
contrary to Mainwaring’s (1992, p. 688) suggestion that label voting corre-
lates highly with leftist ideology. For example, two small leftist parties
received minuscule percentages of label votes in 1994. The excommunist
PPS label vote percentage was reasonably high in 1986 and 1990 but then
dropped precipitously in 1994 to 2.9%, a level equal to the clientelistic par-
ties. The reason for this drop reflects the party’s political strategy in 1994,
when its candidates rode on PT’s coattails in electoral alliances. Only one or
two PPS candidates ran in each district, and they deemphasized the party
label so that the candidates would more likely win a seat within the alliance.
Candidates in the PCdoB, another small resource-poor communist party,
adopted the same strategy in 1994, with similar results (1.8% label votes).
Only one or two candidates from the PCdoB ran in each district, and in televi-
sion commercials during the 1994 campaign, PCdoB candidates deempha-
sized the party label, often not even displaying the traditional hammer and
sickle. Instead, PCdoB candidates emphasized their name and ballot number
(Carneiro & Schmitt, 1995). Thus, these leftist candidates adapted to the
institutional environment and decided to sacrifice collective electoral appeals
and instead adopt individualistic campaign strategies.
At the other end of the political spectrum, the PRONA, a small, resource-
poor conservative party, received an astonishing percentage of label votes in
both 1990 (54.7%) and 1994 (81.7%). In neither election did PRONA enter
any alliances.
DISTRICT-LEVEL STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
The aggregate evidence provided above is suggestive but might be mis-
leading because the national results aggregate state-by-state (i.e., district-
Samuels / CULTIVATING THE VOTE IN CANDIDATE-CENTRIC SYSTEMS
501
ally, even in 1986 and 1990, the PDS/PPR attracted few label votes: São Paulo state accounted
for 39% of the party’s total votes for federal deputy in 1990 but accounted for 65% of the party’s
label votes. Generally, parties that receive a large percentage of their national vote in São Paulo
(PDS) PTB, PSDB, and PMDB demonstrate a drop in label voting outside of that state, whereas
parties with political bases outside of São Paulo show an increase in label voting when São Paulo
is subtracted from their national totals (PDT, PL, PSB, and PRN). This is evidence that parties
simply receive some label votes in their electoral strongholds regardless of whether they culti-
vate the label vote. This does not, however, imply that all parties actually cultivate label votes:
There is a more-than-ideological difference between the PPB, which is strong in São Paulo, and
the PT, which also is strong in São Paulo. The former gained high label votes, but not consis-
tently, either across space or over time. The PT consistently receives more label votes because it
cultivates them.
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
level) results and I only included the 15 largest national parties in the chart. To
reveal more precisely whether campaign finance, pork, and alliance opportu-
nities are important in Brazil, I have constructed two simple statistical mod-
els using district-level data from the 1990 and 1994 federal elections (see
Appendix A for why 1986 was excluded).
Model 1
Model 1 regresses the percentage of each party’s vote in each district that
goes to the label (what the Brazilians call a voto de legenda), indicated by
%LEGENDA. The main variables of interest follow the hypotheses outlined
above. First, following Hypothesis 3, I include two variables that attempt to
capture access to pork: CABINET, a dummy variable that codes all parties in
government and holding ministries in the president’s cabinet at the time of the
election as 1 and all others as 0; and CABPORK, a dummy variable that
equals 1 if a party holds a ministry that distributes pork and 0 otherwise (Fun-
dação Getúlio Vargas, Centro de Pesquisa e Documentação de História Con-
temporânea do Brasil, n.d.).
11 If my hypothesis holds, then parties with pork
portfolios should obtain a lower label vote percentage than parties without
such portfolios. Second, following Hypothesis 4, I include ALLIANCE, a
dummy variable equal to 1 for parties in alliances and 0 for parties running
alone (Câmara dos Deputados, 1987, 1989; Instituto de Estudos Sócio-
Econômicos [INESC], 1994; Senado Federal, 1995; TSE, 1990, 1994). Par-
ties in alliances should obtain a lower percentage of label votes than those not
in alliances. I also include several control variables (described below). I used
weighted least squares multiple regression analysis for each year’s election
12
in equations specified as follows:
502
COMPARATIVE POLITICAL STUDIES / June 1999
11. I considered the following ministries non-pork oriented: gabinete civil (akin to chief of
staff), culture, science and technology, environment, justice, foreign relations, planning, and
economy. My thanks to Octávio Amorim Neto on this point.
12. I used weighted least squares to correct for heteroskedasticity; variables are weighted by
party size and the percentage of the vote that the party received in the state. After running a Chow
test for differences between regressions (see Gujarati, 1988, pp. 443-445), I determined that I
could not pool the two elections’ data and run only one equation without violating the assump-
tion of homoskedasticity. The large differences in residual sum of squares between the two years’
equations may be linked to the ballot structure change in 1994, when party labels were elimi-
nated from the ballot. Running one equation with fixed-effects variables for each year does
imply that the ballot structure change affected voters’propensity to vote for a label (and the fact
that label names were eliminated indicates politicians’ desire for this to happen). The 1994
results are not, however, an aberration: Except for ALLIANCE in 1990, all other variables are
significant in both equations, independently.
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
%LEGENDA = a + β1ALLIANCE + β2CABINET + β3CABPORK
+ β4INCOME + β5MAGNITUDE + β6LEFTIST + β7PT + e
where INCOME is per capita income in the state (Instituto Brasileiro de Geo-
grafia e Estatística [IBGE], 1993, pp. 7-101). This variable controls for any
regional differences across Brazilian states in terms of economic develop-
ment. Socioeconomic factors might influence voters’ propensity to vote for
an individual or a party. MAGNITUDE is the district magnitude—the
number of seats in the district. LEFTIST codes leftist parties (including the
PT) as 1 and all other parties as 0.
13 This variable measures whether leftism
affects whether candidates adopt collectivist or individualistic strategies. PT
is a dummy variable that codes the PT as 1 and all other parties as 0.
If my hypotheses are valid, we should find significant and negative coeffi-
cients on the ALLIANCE and CABPORK variables, whereas the CABINET
variable’s impact is indeterminate. The PT dummy variable, it should be
noted, does not distinguish the PT from all other parties but serves as an inter-
active variable with the LEFTIST dummy variable: The PT variable thus dis-
tinguishes the PT only from all other leftist parties, and we expect it to have a
strongly positive coefficient, whereas we expect no positive impact of
LEFTIST ideology. We expect MAGNITUDE to have a negative coefficient,
if any: As the district gets larger, the fight for personal votes should get rela-
tively more desperate (Carey & Shugart, 1995). I also included an indicator
of socioeconomic development: per capita INCOME. Following a standard
political science argument, some have claimed that Brazil’s more developed
regions should more likely see party-oriented voting (Schwartzman, 1975).
The results in Table 3 confirm most of my hypotheses.
14 The ALLIANCE
variable is strongly significant in the 1994 election, and the CABPORK vari-
able is strongly significant in both elections. INCOME shows a statistically
significant impact in 1994 but not in 1990. Further investigation into the rela-
tionship between socioeconomic variables and political strategy across Bra-
zil’s widely disparate regions could prove fruitful.
15 In addition, contrary to
Carey and Shugart (1995), MAGNITUDE exhibits a small but statistically
Samuels / CULTIVATING THE VOTE IN CANDIDATE-CENTRIC SYSTEMS
503
13. I coded the following parties as leftist: PSB, PPS, PCdoB, PT, and PDT (see Mainwaring,
1995). I did not code the PSDB as leftist based on its less-than-consistent attention to left-
ideological programmatic positions.
14. I use one-tailed tests because I have strong theoretical reasons to suggest the slope of the
betas on my variables of interest (see Lewis-Beck, 1980, pp. 33-34; Gujarati, 1988, p. 108).
15. To see if the results from the state of São Paulo distort the findings, I ran a regression
for each equation that excluded the cases from that state. Doing so does not change my results
for 1990; in the 1994 equation, none of my main variables were affected; however, M lost
significance.
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 19 ===
significant upward pressure on the label vote totals.
16 Finally, as expected,
although LEFTIST ideology in general has no effect, the PT distinguishes
itself from its ideological fellow travelers by gaining many label votes.
17
Model 2
Model 2 includes data on candidates’ access to campaign finance. I run a
separate regression with this variable for two reasons: first, because I only
have data for the 1994 elections; and second, because I only have donation
data for 213 cases in 1994 as opposed to the 358 cases in Model 1 (not all
504
COMPARATIVE POLITICAL STUDIES / June 1999
16. The results should be interpreted in the following way: In 1990, for every one-seat
increase in district magnitude, a party would more likely get about 0.2% more label votes.
17. The PT does not drive the equations: Taking the PT out of the equations and running them
again does not change the direction of any variable and only minimally affects the magnitude of
the betas, except for the ALLIANCE variable in 1994 (β = –1.45, not significant). Of impor-
tance, without the PT data, the LEFTIST variable hardly changes (compare 1990 LEFTIST
without the PT: β = 3.27, not significant; 1994 without the PT: β = .72, not significant), indicating
that leftism independently matters little for label promotion.
Table 3
Determinants of Label Voting in Brazilian Legislative Elections, 1990-1994
Estimated Coefficient (SE)
Variable
1990
1994
ALLIANCE
–2.27 (2.10)
–2.97 (.85)***
CABINET
–.41 (1.96)
1.27 (.66)*
CABPORK
–4.44 (2.17)*
–1.59 (.60)**
INCOME
.28 (.21)
.39 (.07)***
MAGNITUDE
.20 (.05)***
.05 (.02)***
LEFTIST
2.67 (2.30)
.48 (.83)
PT
18.61 (3.16)***
22.98 (1.00)***
Constant
7.86 (2.88)**
.87 (1.12)
R2
.30
.76
SER
33.32
11.14
N
314
358
ALLIANCE = a dummy variable equal to 1 for parties in alliances and 0 for parties running
alone; CABINET = a dummy variable that codes all parties in government and holding minis-
tries in the president’s cabinet at the time of the election as 1 and all others as 0; CABPORK = a
dummy variable that equals 1 if a party holds a ministry that distributes pork and 0 otherwise; IN-
COME = a variable measuring per capita income in the state; MAGNITUDE = a variable meas-
uring the district magnitude—the number of seats in the district; LEFTIST = a variable that
codes leftist parties (including the PT) as 1 and all other parties as 0; and PT = a dummy variable
that codes the PT as 1 and all other parties as 0. SER = standard error of the regression.
*p < .05. **p < .01. ***p < .001.
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 20 ===
candidates presented declarations; in particular, candidates in smaller parties
failed to do so) (see Appendix B). The model includes all of the variables
used in Model 1 as well as a variable denominated DONATIONS, which is
the mean declared donation to a party’s federal deputy candidates in a given
district (TSE, 1997). Following Hypothesis 2, as candidates have access to
more money, they should campaign more individualistically and label voting
should decline. Table 4 relates the results of Model 2.
The results confirm my hypothesis that access to campaign finance influ-
ences label voting: DONATIONS has a statistically significant negative
impact, even with the reduced N.
18
In sum, although future research could provide better operational indica-
tors of access to pork and investigate the impact of socioeconomic variables
on voters’ propensity to respond to deliberate promotion of the party label
(e.g., at the state and municipal level), both the descriptive and quantitative
Samuels / CULTIVATING THE VOTE IN CANDIDATE-CENTRIC SYSTEMS
505
Table 4
Determinants of Label Voting in Brazilian Legislative Elections,
Including Campaign Donations, 1994
Variable
Estimated Coefficient (SE)
ALLIANCE
–3.79 (1.09)***
CABINET
1.58 (.86)*
CABPORK
–1.84 (.82)*
DONATIONS
–.000054 (.00000886)*
INCOME
.35 (.09)***
MAGNITUDE
.06 (.02) ***
LEFTIST
.59 (.90)
PT
21.21 (1.16)***
Constant
2.43 (1.40)*
R2
.77
SER
6.65
N
213
Dependent variable = %LEGENDA; ALLIANCE = a dummy variable equal to 1 for parties in
alliances and 0 for parties running alone; CABINET = a dummy variable that codes all parties in
government and holding ministries in the president’s cabinet at the time of the election as 1 and
all others as 0; CABPORK = a dummy variable that equals 1 if a party holds a ministry that dis-
tributes pork and 0 otherwise; INCOME = a variable measuring per capita income in the state;
MAGNITUDE = a variable measuring the district magnitude—the number of seats in the dis-
trict; LEFTIST = a variable that codes leftist parties (including the PT) as 1 and all other parties
as 0; and PT = a dummy variable that codes the PT as 1 and all other parties as 0. SER = standard
error of the regression.
*p < .05. **p < .01. ***p < .001.
18. The coefficient on DONATIONS reveals that one Real donated to candidates in a given
party reduces that party’s label vote by .0000154%.
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 21 ===
analyses tend to confirm my hypotheses: Although most Brazilian candidates
seek money and pork and their parties consequently fail to develop a label,
some parties do encourage label voting as a short-term expedient. In this
regard, no clear pattern exists across the political spectrum; in fact, small par-
ties across the spectrum vary in their adopted strategy. Leftist ideology is not
a sufficient cause of promotion of a party label. Instead, resource constraints
and alliance options play important causal roles. Of the large Brazilian par-
ties, only the PT has generated a sizable percentage of label votes consis-
tently. The difference between the PT and the others demands further
exploration.
THE WORKERS’ PARTY AND OPEN-LIST PR
The empirical data confirm what Brazilianists already know: The PT gets
a big label vote. In this section, I question whether ideology is a sufficient
explanation for this result and investigate in more detail the institutional
underpinnings behind PT candidates’ behavior. How does the PT do it? Are
the same factors that I considered in Sections 3 and 4—nomination control,
access to pork, alliance options—relevant?
The PT is an important actor in Brazilian politics: It is now the fifth largest
party in Congress, with 10% of the seats; its candidate (Lula) has finished
second in the last three presidential races; its candidates have won the may-
or’s office of some of Brazil’s largest cities, including São Paulo; and in 1994,
the party won its first two statehouses. The PT has demonstrated that there is
room for a programmatic party in Brazilian politics.
I have argued that political strategy matters for promotion of a label. In this
section, I argue that by institutionalizing certain rules, PT politicians have
successfully bound their own hands, and consequently, unlike politicians in
other (leftist and rightist) parties that lack such internal rules, they have insti-
tutionalized their party’s label over time. The way in which PT politicians
have implemented these mechanisms is not random, nor, as leftists, are their
motivations merely ideological; the PT’s ideology is not a sufficient condi-
tion to explain the party’s durable label. In fact, although socialist ideology
did play an important role in the PT’s self-definition, the party has deliber-
ately never defined a concrete and unified political line onto which voters
could easily latch (Garcia, 1991; Gurgel, 1989), as have other Brazilian leftist
parties (with less electoral success, it should be noted). The creation of rules
is strategic, as well as causal, because it affects the long-term behavior both of
PT politicians and Brazilian voters. These institutional innovations are the
key to understanding how the PT has found a niche in the individualistic
506
COMPARATIVE POLITICAL STUDIES / June 1999
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 22 ===
Brazilian electoral system that the conventional wisdom describes and how,
given the PT’s lack of resources and allies early on, it was able to institution-
alize a party label.
Hypothesis 1: Nomination and Access Control
First, consider the PT’s efforts to institutionalize a party structure that held
elected representatives collectively accountable to each other and that held
elected representatives accountable to the party’s popular base. This innova-
tion has allowed the PT to develop a nationwide reputation. Although, as in
all other parties, nomination is decentralized, the PT requires that candidates
for legislative office be nominated by party núcleos (local organizations)
instead of through elite negotiations in the state executive committee (Sader
& Silverstein, 1991, p. 80). Furthermore, unlike all other parties, the PT pro-
hibits use of the birthright candidate (candidato nato) rule, retaining the
power to deny deputies a slot on the label come reelection time. In addition,
although the party legally cannot impose an order on its candidate list, in con-
trast to other parties, the PT nominated only one candidate per seat, even
though prior to 1994 it could nominate 1.5 candidates per slot for legislative
posts (Keck, 1992).
19 All told, then, even though nomination is still decentral-
ized, PT elected leaders are far more beholden to the party than are deputies
from other parties.
The PT has institutionalized other rules that discourage individualistic
behavior. For example, to maintain its commitment to intraparty democracy
and philosophical eclecticism (Gurgel, 1989, p. 88), the party institutional-
ized factions, but they were institutionalized in a way that maintained party
cohesion (Keck, 1992, p. 117): The party allows extensive internal debate,
but after internal votes are taken, the party demands “obligatory respect for
decisions” (Keck, 1992, p. 96) under the threat of expulsion (Keck, 1992, pp.
222, 230, 235; Novaes, 1993, p. 125), a credible threat that has been carried
out on several occasions. Although tension has resulted from the imposition
of collective decisions on elected officials (Keck, 1992, p. 216) and PT depu-
ties are hardly a set of doctrinal clones, the party continues to demand and
obtain cohesive behavior from its elected officials. In particular, the PT gets
exceptionally high cohesion on congressional roll-call votes, nearly 100%
(Figueiredo & Limongi, 1995a, 1995b). No other party obtains such high dis-
cipline, which highlights the success of the combination of internal democ-
racy and collective and individual responsibility to the party that the PT has
Samuels / CULTIVATING THE VOTE IN CANDIDATE-CENTRIC SYSTEMS
507
19. However, interviews with PT officials in Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo suggest that prior
to 1994, filling legislative slates with even one candidate per position was difficult for the PT.
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 23 ===
engineered. Elected leaders are accountable to each other and depend elec-
torally on each other.
The rules cited above, in combination with the drastic requirement that all
PT elected officials must give 30% of their salary to the party, create a sort of
implicit nomination control: They effectively dissuade all but the most com-
mitted from joining the party. Interviews confirm that the although some can-
didates find the rules tying elected officials to the party appealing, these same
rules, and not differences in leftist ideology, often dissuade candidates from
entering the PT (Marco Aurélio Garcia, member of the PT National Execu-
tive, personal communication, São Paulo, June 29, 1995; Léo Lince, chief
aide to the PT leader in the Rio de Janeiro statehouse, personal communica-
tion, July 24, 1994; Jaílson de Souza Silva, member of the PT state directory
in Rio de Janeiro, personal communication, July 22, 1994). Moreover, as
party officials acknowledge, threatened sanctions are heeded because indi-
vidual politicians, who came to the party lacking resources, know that they
would be a fish out of water were they to leave the PT (Marco Aurélio Garcia,
personal communication, São Paulo, June 29, 1995). Because of these rules,
the PT possesses a largely impermeable recruitment structure, defined as one
in which “all higher-level officers and candidates are recruited from lower
levels within the party” (Strom, 1990, p. 579). Evidence for the PT’s imper-
meability comes from comparing the rates at which Brazilian deputies
change parties: Whereas party switching is common in the Brazilian Cham-
ber of Deputies (260 changes occurred during the 1991-1994 legislature,
when there were 503 deputies), the PT exhibited the lowest level of migration
either to or from other parties (Nicolau, 1996). The less a party acts as a
revolving door, the more likely it is that the party has created internal rules
that discourage both inmigration or outmigration and the more likely it is that
the party members have attempted to preserve the value of the party label.
In sum, the PT is the only Brazilian party that has institutionalized internal
rules that counter Brazil’s notoriously individualistic electoral rules. These
internal party institutions push PT politicians to adopt more collective strate-
gies, strengthening the party label.
Hypotheses 2 and 3: Lack of Resources
Next, consider PT candidates’historical lack of resources. Brazil has had
many leftist parties. Whereas other Brazilian parties, including leftist ones
(such as the PTB and PDT), have traditionally formed from the top down, the
PT’s leaders organized the party from the bottom up, without access to gov-
ernmental goods and without deep pockets backing their efforts. As shown in
508
COMPARATIVE POLITICAL STUDIES / June 1999
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 24 ===
Table 1, PT candidates have fewer monetary resources for campaigning.
Moreover, since its formation the PT has won relatively few executive-level
positions; although it has won a few spectacular victories at the municipal
level (such as the city of São Paulo in 1988), only in 1994 did it win two
gubernatorial races. This lack of access to executive office means that, unlike
other parties, the PT has not built up an extensive clientelistic network that
depends on access to government for survival. Instead, grassroots unions and
social movements opposing Brazil’s military regime in the late 1970s pro-
vided the base for the party’s formation and electoral growth. The key differ-
ence between the PT and its leftist contemporaries is that the party’s rank and
file have been important political resources and have taken an active role in
party planning, institutionalizing, and decision making (Keck, 1992; Sader &
Silverstein, 1991). Thus, although the PT as an organization has greater
resources than do other parties, as in other Brazilian parties, the PT does not
pay its candidates’ campaign expenses. Instead, PT candidates use the PT’s
organizational resources, which results in a different campaign style.
Hypothesis 4: Alliance Strategy
Finally, consider how the PT’s electoral alliance strategy generates a col-
lective party image. At its inception, the PT eschewed electoral alliances in
order to establish a collective reputation. For example, in 1982, the PT
refused to join the largest opposition party (the PMDB) in alliances in order to
affirm its presence as “an autonomous force” (Sader & Silverstein, 1991, p. 80).
Prior to 1985, even discussion of entering alliances was considered taboo
(Keck, 1992) because PT candidates felt that alliances would “dilute the par-
ty’s program” (Keck, 1992, p. 226). By the late 1980s, however, the party had
modified its tactics and began to enter alliances. Still, the PT did not succumb
to the temptation to ally with any party simply for short-term expedient. The
PT has never abandoned its position as standard-bearer of the opposition and
has tactically chosen to ally only with opposition parties. In 1994, smaller
leftist parties sacrificed their own party labels to free ride on the PT’s popular
national image.
20 Moreover, the PT has maintained a national alliance strat-
egy: The national directory imposes a right of veto on state directories’ alli-
ance decisions (Nicolau, 1994, p. 18). Thus, although the PT now commonly
enters electoral alliances, contrary to what my hypothesis might predict,
Samuels / CULTIVATING THE VOTE IN CANDIDATE-CENTRIC SYSTEMS
509
20. The PT recognizes that alliances allow smaller parties to free ride but makes this sacrifice
to garner support for its executive-office candidates (José Luís Fevereiro, member of the PT
National Executive Committee, personal communication, Rio de Janeiro, July 26, 1994; see also
“Tempo de TV”, 1994; “Tempo na TV”, 1994.
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 25 ===
because the PT initially eschewed alliances, it initially established a strong
national partisan reputation. Currently, unlike other parties (which never had
strong labels to begin with), because the PT maintains a consistent national
alliance strategy, it has consequently been able to counter the predicted
impact of entering alliances and maintained the image of its party label intact.
EFFECTS OF PT STRATEGY: CAMPAIGN BEHAVIOR
What are the effects of nomination control, lack of resources, and a
national alliance strategy? How do the PT’s internal rules play out in electoral
politics? Following the hypotheses elaborated above, PT candidates innovate
cheaper ways of attracting votes: During campaigns, PT candidates deliber-
ately attempt to attract label votes. Party leaders encourage candidates to
incorporate broad themes, such as opposition to the national government and
promotion of social rights, into the context of local issues. Adopting broad
appeals levels the playing field for the PT because it has fewer financial
resources. For example, one labor-intensive way in which the PT promotes
the party vote happens on election day: The PT brings activists to polling
places with signs and banners that read “Vote #13” (the party’s official elec-
toral code number) or “Vote PT” to encourage those who have not made the
choice of an individual candidate to cast a party vote.
In addition, the PT uses its media exposure differently than other parties,
encouraging voters to vote the label. Brazilian law prohibits individual candi-
dates from independently advertising on television and radio. The govern-
ment instead allots air time to parties, which broadcast their programs twice a
day, every day, for 2 months before elections.
21 Parties decide how to divide
their allotted time. Because the personal vote is most important for all candi-
dates, we can assume that all candidates would rather have more TV time
than less. Distribution of TV time causes fierce intraparty squabbles because
the average time that each candidate gets is generally very short. In Rio de
Janeiro in 1994, PT candidates received 9 seconds each, once a week. For the
larger parties, candidates could get 30 seconds each.
The PT in Rio de Janeiro deliberately attempted to increase its label vote
by promoting a puxador de legenda (literally, a vote puller) during its free
media time in 1994. This entailed granting more airtime to one candidate
over the rest.
22 The candidate did not then engage in self-promotion but
instead encouraged voters to mark their ballots for the PT label, as he
510
COMPARATIVE POLITICAL STUDIES / June 1999
21. One third of the time is divided equally and two thirds of the time is allotted proportion-
ally according to each party’s number of seats in the Chamber of Deputies (see Câmara dos
Deputados, 1993).
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 26 ===
recognized his colleagues expected of him (Milton Temer, PT candidate for
federal deputy, personal communication, Rio de Janeiro, July 25, 1994).
23
The logic behind this party decision is clear: With a marketable party label,
and free air time, the PT can cheaply provide an information shortcut to vot-
ers; the PT employs a collective puxador de legenda because its candidates
lack the financial resources to run expensive modern campaigns.
SUMMARY: THE PT LABEL OVER THE LONG TERM
Why adopt a structure that enhances cohesion? During the early phases of
Brazil’s redemocratization (1978-1980), only the formation of a different
party, with a strong organizational structure, would guarantee to the hetero-
geneous political and social movements and their potential electoral support-
ers that the PT would tie its own hands and remain distinct in the long term.
These groups had been either excluded from channeling their demands
through representative political institutions or were simply disenchanted
with the political process. To convince these groups that the PT would remain
different, PT politicians had to innovate rules to make themselves more
dependent on their own organization. By enforcing cohesion and promoting a
label, PT politicians created a cheap baseline political identity that could be
marketed to a broad spectrum of social groups and lowered the costs to indi-
viduals or small groups of participating in politics. The relative success of the
PT is a testament to this strategy.
PT leaders and representatives have incentives to promote cohesion that
others do not: Their effectiveness does not depend on allegiance to a political
boss, or being able to buy votes, but on the effectiveness and success of their
organization. PT politicians favor long-term collective interests, although
immediate electoral considerations are of course important. This is sig-
nificantly different from other parties’ legislators, who value long-term
individual gain above all. Similar to other leftist politicians, PT politicians
have different political goals and resources from other nonleftists, but,
unlike other leftist politicians, the PT has invested in cohesive,
Samuels / CULTIVATING THE VOTE IN CANDIDATE-CENTRIC SYSTEMS
511
22. The PT’s puxadores de legenda had 30 seconds, whereas other candidates had 9 seconds
perappearance.Inotherparties,apuxadorisnotnominated,itsimplydefinesapopularcandidate.
23. The decision to let a candidate act as puxador and receive extra TV or radio time creates
jealousy and intense rivalry within the PT. As Adilson Pires, PT city council member in Rio de
Janeiro (personal communication, July 23, 1994) put it,
Of 46 deputy candidates we have, 33 will get about 2,000 votes. They have absolutely
no chance. The real battle for the seats is with the next 10 guys, who get about 10,000
votes each. The puxadores will get 20,000 votes each. So the real problem for us is
who gets to be puxador.
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 27 ===
programmatic behavior by developing an array of powerful internal rules.
This creates a stronger party label in comparison with other Brazilian parties
across the political spectrum.
In sum, the PT’s founders, by deciding to enter electoral politics, had to
take institutions into account. Because the PT was not linked to government,
was not formed from within the Congress, did not have an established team of
well-known politicians, and generally lacked financial resources, it could not
compete on the same turf as the other parties by using similar tactics. Instead,
the PT had to differentiate its identity, and its candidates’ identities, from
other politicians and parties. Unlike other leftist parties in Brazilian history,
such as the PTB, to ensure that individual politicians would resist the tempta-
tion of the pork barrel and to realize its long-term goals, the PT institutional-
ized its difference. These internal party institutions, more so than PT ideol-
ogy (which the PT has never defined), make the costs of defection by an
individual PT politician much higher than they are to politicians in other (left-
ist) parties. PT elected officials owe their mandates, and political futures,
much more to the party than do politicians from other parties. Because of
internal party rules, and not simply ideology, PT politicians behave differ-
ently both within the party and in the public arena. The result is cohesiveness
and the use of a strong party label. Voters clue into this cue, causing the PT to
consistently gain more party-label votes than other parties. This institutional
innovation in the Brazilian system has proved to be the PT’s strength over the
last 15 years.
24
CONCLUSION
This article contributes to our understanding of how politicians with dif-
ferent resources and strategies adapt to a given set of electoral rules and has
advanced our understanding of Brazilian electoral politics. First, I argued
that although analysts correctly claim that a given electoral system creates
static incentives to promote more or less individualism, this notion provides
little purchase on assessing the causes of within-system variation on the same
dependent variable. Thus, although a system’s electoral rules may push
toward individualism, I argue that not all politicians have the capability to
compete effectively with a purely individualistic strategy. Although being in
512
COMPARATIVE POLITICAL STUDIES / June 1999
24. Given the PT’s electoral success, it now has deputies in many states and has cracked the
executive-office barrier by winning two statehouses in 1994. The temptations of office holding
and Brazil’s vast regional differences may strain the PT’s cohesiveness. However, if the PT
maintains its internal rules and its alliance strategy, it ought to also retain its strong national party
label. Only time will tell.
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 28 ===
an alliance may push candidates to downplay their partisan attachments, can-
didates may be restrained by owing their nomination to the central party and
they may lack access to money and/or patronage. Therefore, some politicians
adapt to the rules and appeal to those voters who are either not linked to a
patronage system or who reject it.
Second, I used electoral data from Brazil’s recent congressional elections
to test the hypothesized relationships and found that access to campaign
finance and pork and alliance strategy influence a party’s promotion of its
label. Several important new findings emerged from this analysis. The most
significant finding was that although many parties gain sizable percentages
of label votes, the Workers’Party is the only large Brazilian party to exhibit a
consistently high percentage of label votes across space and time, which con-
firms the street-knowledge perception that the PT is distinct from the mass of
rent-a-parties that characterize Brazilian electoral politics in that it has a
nationally recognizable party label.
I also found that no clear pattern on the dependent variable exists across
the political spectrum in Brazil, illuminating the counterintuitive finding that
for important aspects of electoral strategy in Brazil, institutional rules trump
ideology. In Brazil, the consequences of ideology in general remain unclear
in terms of electoral strategy: Politicians in leftist parties do not necessarily
cultivate labels, do not necessarily eschew personalism and cultivate policy-
oriented votes, and do not necessarily develop an obviously different connec-
tion to voters, at least in terms of directing their supporters in how to vote.
Conversely, rightist parties do not necessarily always cultivate only personal
votes. At times, particularly for small parties, resource limits and alliance
possibilities push parties on the left to adopt personalistic strategies and push
parties on the right to adopt collective strategies.
Finally, I explained how PT politicians counteract the incentives of the
electoral system over the long term. The PT’s leftist ideology, which the party
has refused to define exactly, may be a necessary condition but is not a suffi-
cient explanation for the cohesion that the party demonstrates and its promo-
tion of a party label. Instead, PT politicians have distinguished themselves
from others, particularly other leftists, by making the costs of individualistic
behavior too high. Several sanctioning mechanisms, including controlling
access to the label and credibly threatening expulsion, achieve this result.
Consequently, the benefits of a party label have exceeded the costs, and the
PT remains the only party to consistently gain a high percentage of label
votes in legislative elections across Brazil.
Although I have provided details on only one country, the logic of my
hypotheses is general and builds on Strom’s (1990) and Myerson’s (1993)
Samuels / CULTIVATING THE VOTE IN CANDIDATE-CENTRIC SYSTEMS
513
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 29 ===
theoretical approaches to the study of the behavior of candidates and political
parties and Carey and Shugart’s (1995) effort to compare the incentives for
individualism that various electoral systems generate. Future research could
extend this argument and attempt to explain variation across parties in other
candidate-centric systems.
APPENDIX A
Electoral Data
I compiled electoral data from Brazil’s Tribunal Superior Eleitoral (TSE) com-
puter diskettes for 1990 and 1994. I calculated the percentage of every party’s label
vote and total vote in every district (state) for 1994. For 1990, I excluded the state of
Goiás because of a recording of “zero” label votes in that state, an impossible result.
The TSE never prepared a complete set of election returns for 1986. I obtained
computer printouts from state Regional Electoral Tribunals. Several states are miss-
ing, including Rondônia, Acre, Piauí, Paraíba, Paraná, Rio Grande do Sul, Mato
Grosso do Sul, and Goiás. Moreover, the results from several other states do not allow
one to separate out the label votes by party because they are grouped by alliance.
I also do not have complete data on alliances; this problem was particularly acute
for 1986. The TSE does not provide data on parties or alliances of parties that do not
win at least one seat in either federal or state elections. Thus, although for the three
elections I found 1,136 cases, I only had alliance membership data for 672 cases.
Because I lacked complete electoral returns and adequate alliance data for 1986, I
excluded that year’s election from the regression.
APPENDIX B
Campaign Finance Data
No empirical studies of campaign spending in Brazil exist because Brazilian law
does not require candidates to detail expenditures. However, for the 1994 elections,
Brazil’s Tribunal Superior Eleitoral (TSE) required candidates to submit a prestação
de contas (registry of campaign contributions) (TSE, 1997).25 Because the TSE lacks
mechanisms to enforce its rules, we can assume that candidates underreported
514
COMPARATIVE POLITICAL STUDIES / June 1999
25. The data contain information on all registered campaign contributions (n = 141,162) to
candidates for the following offices during the 1994 calendar year: president, governor, senator,
federal deputy, and state deputy. Candidates are required to send a report to their state’s regional
electoral tribunal, which then sends all records from the state to the Tribunal Superior Eleitoral
(TSE) in Brasília. Twenty-four states sent records: Rio de Janeiro, Alagoas, and Mato Grosso do
Sul did not. Not all candidates submitted a prestação de contas: For federal deputy, the 24 states
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 30 ===
contributions. However, we can also assume that all candidates have the same incen-
tives to underreport (or not), and so although reported donations may only represent
some fraction of total campaign expenditures, the ratio of the average donations in a
state of one type of office to the others is likely to reflect accurately the relative costs
of each type of campaign.26
In 1994, winning candidates declared the following donations, on average:
Position
Amount (rounded to nearest thousand)
Governor
R$2,497,000
Senator
R$377,000
Federal Deputy
R$94,000
State Deputy
R$34,000
From the data, we see that, on average, a winning gubernatorial candidate declares
about 6 times more than a winning senatorial candidate, who in turn declares about 4
times more than a winning candidate for federal deputy. A winning candidate for fed-
eral deputy declares about 3 times as much as a winning candidate for state deputy
(TSE, 1997).
Can we trust the data? Declared donations do range considerably by state and by
candidate, particularly for gubernatorial and senatorial candidates. For example, the
winning candidates for governor in the (relatively poor) states of Piauí and Paraíba
declared donations of R$310,000 and R$320,000, respectively, whereas their coun-
terparts in the (relatively rich) states of São Paulo and Minas Gerais declared dona-
tions of R$10 million and R$11 million, respectively. Two winning Partido dos Tra-
balhadores (Workers’ Party, PT) senate candidates from small, poor states declared
donations of only R$3,500 and R$6,500, respectively, whereas a winning PSDB sen-
ate candidate in São Paulo declared donations of almost R$2 million. From “soaking
and poking” in the field during the 1992, 1994, and 1996 election seasons, I believe
that the wide range particularly evident in declared donations is due to real differences
Samuels / CULTIVATING THE VOTE IN CANDIDATE-CENTRIC SYSTEMS
515
that sent records to the TSE send 450 deputies to Congress. I only included donations made on or
after July 1, 1994: Brazil changed currencies on this day and closely tied its currency’s exchange
rate to the dollar, nearly halting runaway inflation in its tracks. Prior to July 1, 1994, inflation had
been running at between 30% to 50% per month, making currency standardization difficult. This
decision eliminates less than 5% of all donations.
26. Candidates are required to submit receipts of donation amounts and the donor’s
government-issued personal or corporate registration number (cadastro de pessoa físíca [CPF]
or cadastro de pessoa jurídica [CPJ]). All bank transactions require a CPF or CPJ. However, bank
records can only be opened after a lengthy, complex, and costly legal battle, which makes track-
ing donations very difficult. Thus, a candidate could provide a receipt for a $10 donation when in
fact he or she received $10,000. Although TSE officials recognize that this probably occurs fre-
quently, they acknowledged that the phenomenon is also probably randomly distributed across
candidates (Valéria Alves de Sousa, head of internal control, Tribunal Regional Eleitoral, per-
sonal communication, São Paulo, September 23, 1996; Salatiel Carvalho, head of internal con-
trol, TSE, personal communication, Brasília, June 17, 1997.
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 31 ===
in campaign costs and not nonrandom underreporting. For example, PT candidates
have less access to money and rely instead on grassroots get-out-the-vote supporters.
REFERENCES
Ames, Barry. (1995a). Electoral rules, constituency pressures and pork barrel: Bases of voting in
the Brazilian Congress. Journal of Politics, 57(2), 324-343.
Ames, Barry. (1995b). Electoral strategy under open-list proportional representation. American
Journal of Political Science, 39(2), 406-433.
Amorim Neto, Octávio. (1995). Cabinet formation and party politics in Brazil. Paper presented
at the 1995 meeting of the Latin American Studies Association, Washington, DC.
Avelino Filho, George. (1994). Clientelismo e política no Brasil: Revisitando velhos problemas
[Clientelism and politics in Brazil: Revisiting old problems]. Novos Estudos CEBRAP, 38,
225-240.
Câmara dos Deputados. (1987). Eleições de 15 de Novembro de 1986: Candidatos e votos obti-
dos [Elections of November 15, 1986: Candidates and votes obtained]. Brasília: Centro de
Documentação e Informação, Coordenação de Publicações.
Câmara dos Deputados. (1989). Assembléia Nacional Constituinte—1987: Repertório
biográfico dos membros da Assembléia Nacional Constituinte de 1987 [National Constitu-
ent Assembly, 1987: Biographical report of members of the National Constituent Assembly
of 1987]. Brasília: Centro de Documentação e Informação, Coordenação de Publicações.
Câmara dos Deputados. (1993). Mudanças de partido [Party changes]. Brasília: Secretaria Geral
da Mesa/Núcleo de Informática.
Carey, John, & Shugart, Matthew S. (1995). Incentives to cultivate a personal vote: A rank order-
ing of electoral formulas. Electoral Studies, 14(4), 417-435.
Carneiro, Leandro P., & Schmitt, Rogério A. (1995). Eleições casadas, resultados nem sempre
solteiros: Campanhas proporcionais e imagem partidária no horário gratuito de propaganda
eleitoral [Married elections, results not always divorced: Proportional campaigns and party
image on the free electoral propaganda hour]. Opinião Pública, 3(1), 45-59.
Downs, Anthony. (1957). An economic theory of democracy. New York: HarperCollins.
Figueiredo, Argelina C., & Limongi, Fernando. (1995a). Partidos políticos na câmara dos depu-
tados, 1989-1993 [Political parties in the chamber of deputies]. São Paulo: Centro Brasileiro
de Análise e Planejamento.
Figueiredo, Argelina C., & Limongi, Fernando. (1995b). Terra incognita: O Congresso Brasi-
leiro na época os-constituinte [Unknown lands: The Brazilian Congress in the postconstitu-
ent assembly era]. São Paulo: CEBRAP.
Fundação Getúlio Vargas, Centro de Pesquisa e Documentação de História Contemporânea do
Brasil. (n.d.). Gabinete civil da presidência da república: Ministros-chefes [Civil cabinet of
the president of the republic: Chief ministers]. Rio de Janeiro: Author.
Garcia, Marco Aurélio. (1991). Marxismo, Leninismo, e social-democracia [Marxism, Lenin-
ism, and social democracy]. São Paulo: Partido dos Trabalhadores.
Gujarati, Damodar. (1988). Basic econometrics. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Gurgel, Claudio. (1989). Estrelas e borboletas: Origens e questões de um partido a caminho do
poder [Stars and butterflies: Origins and questions of a party on the road to power]. Rio de
Janeiro: Editora Papagaio.
516
COMPARATIVE POLITICAL STUDIES / June 1999
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 32 ===
Hrebenar, Ronald J. (1992). The Japanese party system. Boulder, CO: Westview.
Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística. (1993). Anuário estatístico do Brasil, Volume 53
[Annual statistics of Brazil]. Rio de Janeiro: Author.
Instituto de Estudos Sócio-Econômicos. (1994). Candidatos a governador: Informativo INESC,
Ano VIII, 1st semester [Candidates for governor]. Brasília: Author.
Katz, Richard. (1985). Preference voting in Italy: Votes of opinion, belonging or exchange.
Comparative Political Studies, 18(2), 229-249.
Keck, Margaret. (1992). The workers’ party and democratization in Brazil. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press.
Lamounier, Bolivar. (1991). Depois da transição: Democracia e eleições no Governo Collor
[After the transition: Democracy and elections in the Collor government]. São Paulo:
Edições Loyola.
Lewis-Beck, Michael. (1980). Applied regression: and introduction (Sage University Paper
Series, No. 22). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Mainwaring, Scott. (1991, October). Politicians, parties and electoral systems: Brazil in com-
parative perspective. Comparative Politics, 24, 21-43.
Mainwaring, Scott. (1992). Brazilian party underdevelopment in comparative perspective.
Political Science Quarterly, 107(4), 677-707.
Mainwaring, Scott. (1995). Brazil: Weak parties, feckless democracy. In Scott Mainwaring &
Timothy Scully (Eds.), Parties and party systems in Latin America. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.
Mainwaring, Scott. (in press). The party system and democratization in Brazil. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Meneguello, Rachel. (1989). PT: A formação de um partido, 1979-1982 [PT: The formation of a
party, 1979-1982]. Rio de Janeiro: Paz e Terra.
Myerson, Roger B. (1993). Incentives to cultivate favored minorities under alternative electoral
systems. American Journal of Political Science, 87, 856-869.
Nicolau, Jairo. (1994). Breves comentários sobre as eleições de 1994 e o quadro político [Brief
commentary on the 1994 elections and the partisan situation]. Cadernos de Conjuntura
IUPERJ, 50, 15-19.
Nicolau, Jairo. (1996). A migração partidária na câmara dos deputados (1991-96) [Party-
switching in the chamber of deputies (1991-96)]. Monitor Público, 3(10), 41-45.
Novaes, Carlos Alberto Marques. (1993, March). PT: Dilemas da burocratização [PT: Dilemmas
of bureaucratization]. Novos Estudos CEBRAP, 35, 217-237.
Popkin, Samuel. (1990). The reasoning voter. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Sader, Emir, & Silverstein, Ken. (1991). Without fear of being happy: Lula, the workers’party
and Brazil. New York: Verso.
Schwartzman, Simon. (1975). São Paulo e o estado nacional [São Paulo and the national state].
São Paulo: Difusão Européio do Livro.
Senado Federal. (1995). Deputados Brasileiros: Repertório biográfico [Brazilian deputies: Bio-
graphical report]. Brasília: Centro Gráfico do Senado Federal.
Strom, Kaare. (1990). A behavioral theory of competitive political parties. American Journal of
Political Science, 34(2), 565-598.
Tempo de TV causa briga na aliança do PT [Allocation of TV time causes battle within the PT
alliance]. (1994, June 7). Jornal do Brasil, p. A7.
Tempo na TV abala a coligação petista [Allocation of TV time breaks up the PT alliance]. (1994,
June 11). Jornal do Brasil, p. A3.
Tribunal Regional Eleitoral. (1986). Various mimeographed election results.
Tribunal Superior Eleitoral. (1990). Dados estatísticos [Statistical data]. Brasília: Author.
Samuels / CULTIVATING THE VOTE IN CANDIDATE-CENTRIC SYSTEMS
517
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 


=== PDF PAGE 33 ===
Tribunal Superior Eleitoral. (1994). Dados estatísticos [Statistical data]. Brasília: Author.
Tribunal Superior Eleitoral. (1997). Sistema de controle de recursos arrecados—SISCRA [Sys-
tem for the control of campaign contributions]. Brasília: Author.
Valenzuela, Arturo. (1977). Political brokers in Chile: Local government in a centralized polity.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
David J. Samuels received his Ph.D. in political science from the University of California
at San Diego in June 1998. He is currently an assistant professor at the University of
Minnesota, where his research focuses on comparative political institutions and Brazil-
ian politics.
518
COMPARATIVE POLITICAL STUDIES / June 1999
 at UNIV OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA on April 8, 2014
cps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
